---
title: Holy std::borrow::Cow!
---

Recently I got into a 
[reddit discussion](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/3cl12r/is_rust_too_complicated/csxee09?context=3) 
about how lifetimes are in fact quite hard. Not having had to deal with 
lifetimes and ownership so far within clippy, because just about 
everything we use is already owned by the compiler, I did not have much 
of an opinion about lifetimes, when user The_Doculope stated:

> This is where lifetime elision bites us in the ass.

(/u/The_Doculope on [/r/rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust))

Needless to say I was shocked!

> And here I am, thankful lifetime elision freed me from worrying to 
> much, only to learn that it's out to bite me in the ass. Now I'm 
> becoming paranoid. ;-P

(me on [/r/rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust))

Right after writing this, I happened upon a source line in clippy I 
wasn't quite happy with, because it cloned a string (with 
`.to_string()`! blasphemy!) just to use it in a `&format(…)`. Now this 
was in a `Result<String, …>::unpack_or(…)`, so I first tried to wrangle 
the lifetimes of an owned string against a given string, to no avail.

Alas, it was all for naught. I could not give an owned string the same
lifetime as a string borrowed from the compiler, which promptly told me
so in not quite uncertain terms.

I will spare you the gory error messages, as I'm sure if you have 
written code like this in Rust, you will already know them, and 
otherwise, well, it's not so bad anyway, because luckily I remembered 
that handy 
[`std::borrow::Cow`](http://doc.rust-lang.org/std/borrow/enum.Cow.html),
and rewriting the snippet with it (and `std::convert::From`) was a 
piece of cake. I even created a `fn` to make it reusable, thus I now 
have officially written my first lifetime annotation on a method. 
[*ACHIEVEMENT UNLOCKED*]

What does a Cow do (besides saying Moo)? Cow is an abbreviation for 
Clone-on-write (usually Copy on Write, but copy has a different meaning
in Rust), a cool idea that means we can use both an owned instance
of something or a borrowed instance using the same code.

For the interested, the function is:

```Rust
pub fn snippet<'a>(cx: &Context, span: Span, default: &'a str) -> Cow<'a, str> {
    cx.sess().codemap().span_to_snippet(span).map(From::from).unwrap_or(Cow::Borrowed(default))
}
```

Bonus: Perhaps an explanation of the function is in order: The 
`cx.sess().codemap()` fetches the CodeMap from our lint session. This
map has functions to get the source of a Span (which most AST elements
have). Notably, the `span_to_snippet` function takes a span and returns
a `Result<String, SpanSnippetError>` (the error is returned for 
ill-formed spans, or spans which simply have no available source).

Now we have two cases:

1. Our Result `.is_ok()`. We can use the `From` trait to convert our
`String` to a `Cow<'a str>` for any lifetime. Type inference will do
the dirty work for us, all we need is to `map(From::from)`, and we're
golden.

2. We got a `SpanSnippetError`. In this case, we want to return the
default wrapped in a `Cow<'a str>` where `'a` is the lifetime of the
given default argument. This is why I wrote the function generic over
the lifetime of the default argument: We can use its lifetime for our
Cow. To handle this case while getting our `Cow` out of the result, we
use `unwrap_or`.

The `Result` type gives us the neat methods to deal with it in a fairly 
readable way. As `Cow<'a str>` `Deref`s to `str`, we can directly use
it in `format!`. Should we want to change the string, we could have 
used Cow's `into_owned()` function.

The possibly messy handling of lifetimes is reduced to one generic 
lifetime for the function plus two annotations for the argument and 
result. Also, I can use the function everywhere in my code without 
needing to worry over the lifetimes.

So lifetime elision may still bite me in the ass some day. Today was 
not that day.

Continue reading at the [Redux](/2015/07/10/cow-redux.html)...
