---
title: Where are you From::from
subtitle: And what have you turned Into::into?
---

(This article was written with Rust 1.4)

This time, let's look at the `From` and `Into` traits (and some related ones) 
and ask the question when or for what to use them. Note that there are 
specializations (like `IntoIterator`) and variations (like `FromStr`) of those 
traits; it's good to be aware of those when writing Rust code.

`From` and `Into` are like mirrors of each other. `From` abstracts over the 
source type, whereas `Into` abstracts over the target type. There's a blanket 
`Into<T>` impl for each `T` with a matching `From<_>` implementation, so if you 
are a library author, you should consider implementing `From<_>` for your types 
and only resort to `Into<_>` implementations for types you cannot implement 
`From` for because of the orphan rule (which is sadly underdocumented. [Error 
E0117](https://doc.rust-lang.org/error-index.html#E0117) has the goods, if you 
want to read further).

But implementing `From`/`Into` is only half the battle. Knowing where to *use* 
them is the other half. If you program in Rust for some time, you'll notice 
that we Rustaceans make extensive use of the type system; consequently there 
are a lot of types, which means that there are a good number of places where 
conversions *into* other types are needed.

## Example time!

Let's say we have a pretty boring function `foo(bar: &Bar)` where `Bar` is an 
actual type (not a trait). In our case, we also have a `Blob` type which 
contains a `Bar` and a `Buzz` type which can be converted to a `Bar`.

Since we expect our `Blob` using clients to use the `foo` function, we 
implement `From<&Blob> for &Bar` and while we're at it implement 
`From<&Buzz> for Bar` (perhaps also `Buzz` without the reference. If `Buzz` is 
`Copy` we can omit the `&Buzz` implementation and rely on deref coercion). The 
[code](https://play.rust-lang.org/?gist=13e3caea0066b4864ec9&version=stable)
is:

```
use std::convert::*;

struct Bar { num: i32 }

struct Blob { bar: Bar }

struct Buzz { num: i16 }

impl<'a> From<&'a Blob> for &'a Bar {
    fn from(blob: &'a Blob) -> &'a Bar { &blob.bar }
}

impl<'a> From<&'a Buzz> for Bar {
    fn from(buzz: &Buzz) -> Bar { Bar{ num: buzz.num as i32 } }
}

fn foo(bar: &Bar) {
    let _num = bar.num;
    /* some code here */
}
```

Now our `foo(_)` calling clients have those two calls: `foo(&blob.into())` and 
`foo(buzz.into())`. If we have more than two instances, those `.into()` calls 
become pretty repetitive. If all calls are within our own code, we may conclude 
that this cost is acceptable and move on. However, for library APIs, we 
probably want to do better.

Can we move the `.into()` into our `foo` function? Perhaps by using the `Into` 
trait? Let's try that. We change `foo(_)` to the 
[following](https://play.rust-lang.org/?gist=26282e6764552ce8e55f&version=stable):

```
// foo is now generic: It takes anything that we can turn into a Bar reference 
// of any lifetime (which btw. precludes us from returning the Bar reference)
fn foo<'b, B: Into<&'b Bar>>(bar: B) {
    let _num = bar.into().num;
    /* some code here */
}
```

Now we can change our `foo(blob.into())` calls to `foo(blob)`, which is nice. 
Unfortunately for us, we get an error for the `foo(buzz.into())` calls:

```
conv.rs:30:15: 30:21 error: unable to infer enough type information about `_`; type annotations or generic parameter binding required [E0282]
conv.rs:30     foo(&buzz.into());
                         ^~~~~~
conv.rs:30:15: 30:21 help: run `rustc --explain E0282` to see a detailed explanation
error: aborting due to previous error
```

Ok, `rustc`  hasn't found the right `Into` implementation, because doing that 
would have required auto-referencing, which is not implemented in Rust (for 
good reason, I might add). The problem here is the difference between `Bar` and 
`&Bar`. In a more simple example, this would not even happen. Alas, reality is 
scarcely that simple.

## Crossroads

Now we have a few options to solve this problem. Given our Bar can be `Copy`, 
we can simply `#[derive(Copy, Clone)]` for it and change our `From<&Blob>` 
implementation to create a new `Bar` without the reference. We also need to 
change `foo(_)` to take any `<B: Into<Bar>>` (removing the &'b) to 
[get](https://play.rust-lang.org/?gist=cea08895a3e1ce1e98db&version=stable):

```
impl<'a> From<&'a Blob> for Bar {
    fn from(blob: &'a Blob) -> Bar { blob.bar }
}

fn foo<B: Into<Bar>(bar: B) { .. }
```

Now we can also remove the `into()` call from our blobbing foo calls and 
everything's shiny (Note that our foo will actually create a copy of the `bar` 
contained in any `blob`, but at four bytes on the stack, this comes plenty 
cheap. For other types, the tradeoff may be different). `From` has saved the 
day, and we can `foo` all blobs and buzzes to our heart's desire. Also users of 
our `foo` can implement `Into<Bar>` to freely use our `foo(_)` with their 
types. Rainbows and unicorns galore!

Another option is to go on a pasture and find a `std::borrow::Cow` 
([remember](/2015/07/09/cow.html)?), which means paying a small runtime fee for 
a lot of flexibility. We don't need that here, but for more complex `Bar`s, it 
could be worth the price:

```
use std::convert::*;
use std::borrow::*;

// we still need to derive Clone here or create our own ToOwned implementation, 
// though we don't actually need it here.
#[derive(Clone)]
struct Bar {
    num: i32,
}

struct Blob { bar: Bar }

struct Buzz { num: i16 }

impl<'a> From<&'a Blob> for Cow<'a, Bar> {
    fn from(blob: &'a Blob) -> Cow<'a, Bar> { Cow::Borrowed(&blob.borrow().bar) }
}

impl<'a, 'b> From<&'a Buzz> for Cow<'b, Bar> {
    fn from(buzz: &Buzz) -> Cow<'b, Bar> { Cow::Owned(Bar{ num: buzz.num as i32 }) }
}

fn foo<'b, B: Into<Cow<'b, Bar>>>(bar: B) { .. }
```

Now the 
[code](https://play.rust-lang.org/?gist=31396809b2b5efadb834&version=stable) 
generalizes at compile time over the type that in turn generalizes at runtime 
over whether the type can turn `into` a borrowed or owned `Bar`. Depending on 
how complex `foo(_)` and how big `Bar` is, the runtime cost may well be 
negligible.

Finally, we could forgo `Into` and create our own `AsBar` trait that we 
implement for both `&Blob` and `&Buzz` which would afford us the most 
flexibility. However, this means that other crates wishing to reuse our 
`foo(_)` would need their types to implement our `AsBar` trait, too, so we need 
to make it public and document it. I'll leave this version as an exercise to 
the reader.

## Wrapping up

What have we learned? `Into` can make our functions a good deal more flexible 
and present a more usable interface to our clients when implementing a library. 
The downside is that the generics complicate the documentation, but the 
improved ease of use is probably worth – especially if our function can be 
reused with many types and we don't want to have special functions for each 
input type.

Reusing `From`/`Into` saves us some of the work of creating, documenting and 
testing our own traits to do generic conversions within our methods, and they 
give a much appreciated familiarity to our interfaces. Only when we need even 
more flexibility should we implement our own traits to do this.

## Bonus!

Redditor [flying-sheep](https://www.reddit.com/user/flying-sheep) would like me
to mention that implementing `From` is very useful for error handling (his
example follows):

a common wrapping Error looks something like this (if you’re lazy and don’t 
impl `std::error::Error`):

```
#[derive(Debug)]
pub enum Error { TooLong(usize), Io(io::Error) }

impl From<io::Error> for Error {
    fn from(e: io::Error) -> Error { Error::Io(e) }
}
```

then you’re able to simply use `try!(_)` to wrap another error into yours.

```
fn foobar() -> Result<String, Error> {
    let foo = try!(some_io_operation());
    match foo.len() {
        0..12 => Ok(foo),
        n => Err(Error::TooLong(n)),
    }
}
```

----

Discuss at 
[/r/rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/3ughsf/blog_where_are_you_fromfrom/) 
and/or [rust-users](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/blog-where-are-you-from-from/3794/1).
