---
title: An Unfortunate Coercion
---

When we started Rust-clippy's
[eta-reduction lint](https://github.com/Manishearth/rust-clippy/blob/master/src/eta_reduction.rs),
we did not have in mind that calling a closure involves
[deref coercions](http://doc.rust-lang.org/book/deref-coercions.html). This
leads to false positives wherever a closure that takes a reference to `X` is
called with another type that `Deref`s to `X` (as can be seen
[here](https://github.com/Manishearth/rust-clippy/blob/master/src/eq_op.rs#L71)
– the 
[`over`](https://github.com/Manishearth/rust-clippy/blob/master/src/eq_op.rs#L248) 
function is called via a closure to coerce the `std::ptr::P` smart pointers to
`&[PathSegment]` slice refs.

Note that this aren't *exactly* false positives – the closure *is* only calling
the function with its arguments – but due to the deref coercions, our suggestion
of removing the closure will actually lead to errors: Should we change
`over(left, right, |l, r| is_exp_equal(l, r))` to
`over(left, right, is_exp_equal)`, we get

```
src/eq_op.rs:71:5: 71:9 error: type mismatch: the type `fn(&syntax::ast::Expr, 
&syntax::ast::Expr) -> bool {eq_op::is_exp_equal}` implements the trait `for<'r,
'r> core::ops::FnMut<(&'r syntax::ast::Expr, &'r syntax::ast::Expr)>`, but the 
trait `for<'r, 'r> core::ops::FnMut<(&'r syntax::ptr::P<syntax::ast::Expr>, &'r 
syntax::ptr::P<syntax::ast::Expr>)>` is required (expected struct 
`syntax::ptr::P`, found struct `syntax::ast::Expr`) [E0281]
src/eq_op.rs:71     over(left, right, is_exp_equal)
                    ^~~~
src/eq_op.rs:71:5: 71:9 note: required by `eq_op::over`
src/eq_op.rs:71     over(left, right, is_exp_equal)
                    ^~~~
```

So, naturally I first tried to make the `over(..)` function more generic over
`Deref`, but I couldn't get it to work, because the function is sometimes
called with a `P<Vec<X>>` (`P` is rustc's owned smart pointer), and other times
with a `Vec<P<X>>`, which both are silently coerced to `&[X]` for `over`. There
is so much magic going on here that even if there *was* a generic version of
`over(..)`, I would not want to inflict our `eta_reduction` lint in its current
state on anyone who fails to write that version.

<i>(By the way, should you come up with a generic version that works, tell me
to win internet points and bragging rights).</i>

Now due to how the `eta_reduction` lint works, we have a problem: The lint
matches on the closure (as it should), but to weed out the false positives,
we need all expressions calling it. If any of them calls the closure with a
different type than the function takes, we should balk.

The problem is exacerbated by the fact that the closure can be bound within a
let-binding, loaned out to other functions, and taken, shaken, turned all
around, and I think you get the picture. Even worse, closures could be
`pub`lic, in which case all bets are off (However, I suspect this to be a less
common use case).

However, closures can be used as function parameters – a *very* common case.
These functions usually take any of the `Fn*` types. So a possible
approximation that would rid us of the false positives is to search for all
arguments of all function/method calls where the expression type is the type
of our closure and to omit the lint for those. 

But even this crude approximation is a non-trivial undertaking. Also it would
effectively disable the lint (because barring our very synthetic test cases, a
lot of closures are actually used as an argument to some function, e.g.
`Iterator::map(…)`, `Option::and_then` etc. If we don't find a better solution,
we might as well get rid of the lint (or at least `allow` it by default and
change the warning to something more cautious).

Alas, today I'm empty-handed – I've given you the gordian knot, but no sword to
slice it. Perhaps one day there shall be a solution.
