---
title: My first unsafe code (and more)
---

Following a 
[reddit discussion](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/3dfqn2/efficient_optional_values/)
about possible reduction of space consumption for `Option` types, I 
decided to implement 
[my own library](https://github.com/llogiq/optional) as a learning
experience.

I started out with an `OptionBool` enum with three possible values and
tried to naïvely implement all of `Option`s functions. When it came to
the `iter(&self)` function, I dutyfully created an `IterBool` to copy
the contents into which later gets used for iterating.

This appeared to work well enough. I even published it on 
[crates.io](https://crates.io) as 
[optional](http://crates.io/crates/optional) (though, as the README
said at that time, mainly to embarrass myself).

Now I had my own first real library (that I thought should work on 
stable), I wanted to have it tested on that. So with help of 
[some rustaceans](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/3e1xgy/how_do_you_folks_autogenerate_the_doc_pages_for/)
I got it working and even uploading rustdocs to the project's github
pages (I could blog about how awesome both the tools and the community
are, but you already know that, so I won't). I'll just add a small plug 
for Huon Wilson's [travis-cargo](https://github.com/huonw/travis-cargo)
as it may be useful to some of you.

Well, the docs were pretty empty at that stage, but still. 
*ACHIEVEMENT UNLOCKED!*

I also wanted to implement numeric Option-like types that just wrapped
the underlying value, turning one entity of the value domain into a
marker for None. For unsigned integers, I used `std::u*::MAX`, for
signed integers `std::i*::MIN` and for floats `std::f*::NAN`.

To avoid having to implement the whole `Optioned` struct for each of 
the types, I made it generic over the type T, which I bound with a
`Noned` trait that allows to get the `None` value, as well as check if
a value is `None` (this is needed because with floats, `NAN != NAN`).
This works beautifully, and I don't have too much code duplication.

I could use macros to even reduce that, but I'll spare that for a
future version. Still this is the first time I wrote a type to be
generic – another *ACHIEVEMENT UNLOCKED!*

To reduce my embarrassment somewhat, I then decided that I wanted some
tests and docs. So I learned how to do it (you can see my results in 
[lib.rs](https://github.com/llogiq/optional/blob/master/src/lib.rs) if
you're interested) and added a few tests and doctests.

Now being space-efficient is all nice and dandy, but being the 
performance-minded person I am I wanted to know how well my class would
fare against the probably highly optimized Option-class, which is after
all a staple of Rust's standard library. So I wrote a benchmark – and
promptly crashed my build, because stable did not allow the requisite
`test::Bencher` and `test::black_box` items, as they are `unstable`.

*Note to self*: Put benchmarks in the `benches` subdirectory of your
project.

Now that I had actual performance numbers I saw to my great delight 
that my `OptionBool` struct was actually *faster* most of the time when 
compared to `Option<bool>` – well at least after I added `#[inline]` 
just about everywhere. Specialization for the win! One thing however 
stood out. My iterator took about double the time as `Option`'s – the 
compiler had tossed me the gauntlet.

At that time, my iter function consisted of:

```rust
fn iter(&self) { IterBool(value: *self) }
```

where `IterBool` was just a one-element struct wrapping a copy of my
`OptionBool`. I had thought that using a copy *should* be faster than
creating a reference, because it's less memory. I had made that crude
calculation without thinking that the method *already had* the 
reference value on the stack, and making the copy actually required one
to follow the pointer.

At that time I also noticed that I had failed to supply the `as_slice` 
method (to my defence, it is still unstable at this point). Knowing 
that I could have arrays of booleans as `const`, I just created three 
`const [bool]`s and also three `const &[bool]`s pointing to them. Then 
the `as_slice` simply became a match over the three possible values 
returning one of the three const references.

Now my `iter` just became `self.as_slice().iter()`, which was faster 
than `Option`'s. Sorry if I start to bore you, but 
*ACHIEVEMENT UNLOCKED!* :-)

For the final (and titular) achievement, I wanted to also add 
`as_slice` to my `Optioned` type, but as it is generic, I cannot simply
match over all possible values like with `OptionBool`. However, it is
possible to create a slice from a raw pointer and length. Since I *do*
know both – the pointer is always referencing my `Optioned` and the
length is either `0` or `1`, depending on `Noned::is_none(&self)`, it
is actually rather easy to do.

However, this requires use of the 
`unsafe fn std::slice::from_raw_parts(ptr, len)` method. The unsafety
here is obvious, as we need to both uphold Rust's guarantee that the
returned slice won't outlive our particular `Optioned` and our len
isn't greater than the number of elements we actually have. The former
is taken care of by the function signature, which binds the lifetime
of the returned slice to the `Optioned`'s lifetime, while the latter
is quite trivial, since our length can never be greater than `1`.

Still, that unsafe block looks rather awe-inspiring. I'm not sure I
still can call myself a Rust Newbie at this point. 

...

*ACHIEVEMENT UNLOCKED!* Sorry, I just had to :-)

Bonus: I just added
a benchmark for the (still somewhat naïve and totally safe) 
`Optioned::iter()`, `Optioned::as_slice().iter()` and 
`Option<u8>::iter()`. To my surprise, the naïve version is *faster*
than `Option`'s one, which in turn is faster than the slice-based.

I extended the benchmarks to 16-, 32- and 64bit types. It appears
there is a large amount of jitter in the 8- and 16-bit ones, that
may or may not be due to false sharing. The 32- and 64-bit ones 
are quite sane, though, and show very favorable performance.

On [/r/rust](https://reddit.com/r/rust), /u/nessie09 
[pointed out](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/3ed5qi/blog_my_first_unsafe_code_and_more/cted294)
an error in my implementation of `Eq` for `Optioned`, which I 
promptly fixed.

I feel so accomplished... :-)
