---
title: Holy std::borrow::Cow! – Redux
---

[Last time](/2015/07/09/cow.html) I used a very helpful `Cow` to get
around the need to clone a `str`ing just to borrow it. This was my
first application of lifetime annotations, and it felt like quite the
achievement. :smile:

On [/r/rust](https://reddit.com/r/rust), user Artemciy asked the 
following very good [question](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/3cpf3k/blog_holy_stdborrowcow/csydnny)

> [...] How does it work? There seem to be some magic here.
> I mean, how String becomes str?

And also offered a bit of insight:

> P.S. Looks like there's `IntoCow`' implementation in `String` which
> turns it into `str`, but looking at the implementation - it's still 
> the same magic. *Is String secretly a str?*

(emphasis mine)

Good question. In fact, you may want to read the whole exchange for 
some good inquiry, insight, investigation, invalid solutions and 
internet drama. But alas! who has time? So I'm trying to give the gist
from top to bottom.

The first clue is in the `Cow` itself. If we look into the <s>beef</s>
[code](http://doc.rust-lang.org/src/collections/borrow.rs.html#192-200), 
we find the following (modulo documentation and some annotations):

```Rust
pub enum Cow<'a, B: ?Sized + 'a> where B: ToOwned {
    Borrowed(&'a B),
    Owned(<B as ToOwned>::Owned)
}
```

I will not discuss the various `Into` and `From` implementations that 
tie together all the `Cow`s, `String`s and other types; you can look 
them up in the library documentation. This stuff is really genius and 
whoever came up with it probably deserves a Turing Award.

As we know from last time, our type was `Cow<'a str>` (for a given
lifetime 'a, which we took from our default argument). Now this doesn't
say anything about `str` or `String` at all? Where do we get the
implementation from?

A hint was the `ToOwned` trait bound, which is implemented for `str`.
[Looking into it](http://doc.rust-lang.org/src/collections/str.rs.html#404) 
yields the following (abridged here) definition:

```Rust
impl ToOwned for str {
    type Owned = String;
    fn to_owned(&self) -> String { ... }
}
```

Now here lies one big piece of the puzzle. The definition has an
*associated type* called `Owned`. In the `str` case, the `Owned` type
is...

`String`. Ta-dah!

It also defines how to get a `String` from a `str`, which we will come
to later. Now with this definition our `Cow<'a str>` can become one of:

* `Borrowed(&'a str)`
* `Owned(String)`

which is exactly what we want. If we `Deref` or `Borrow` our Cow, we
will get a `&'a str` out of it (in the owned case, it will just borrow
our wrapped owned instance), and if we asked for `.to_owned()`, we will
always get a `String` (as per the `ToOwned` implementation above).

Nice. But we're not done yet. We haven't answered the question if our
handy dandy `String` is actually leading a double life, and becoming a
`str` at full moon, at dawn, or whenever the mood strikes. Or as 
Artemciy put it: *Is String secretly a str?*

I believe that everyone should have the choice to come out on their own 
terms, so it seems a bit rude to meddle in the affairs of Rust types.
However, `String` is certainly acting suspicious, and there's nothing 
like a good detective story. Just don't tell `String` where you got 
it's little secret from, should we actually find something.

Starting our investigation, we do have some clues:

* Whenever we borrow (i.e. reference) a `String`, we get `&str`. Wait.
Eddy B. [points out](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/3ct5yx/blog_holy_stdborrowcow_redux/csyqzsb)
that I am mistaken: Any `&String` is of type `&String`. It's actually
the *Deref Coercion* that coerces it into a `&str`, because of a 
`Deref` implemented on `String` whose associated `target` type is `str` 
* Whenever we want an owned `str`, we actually get a `String`
* Both dereferencing a `&str` and a `&String` gives us the same `str`

Now what *is* a `str`? And what is a `String`?

The documentation tells us the following of 
[str](http://doc.rust-lang.org/std/str):

> Rust's `str` type is one of the core primitive types of the language. 
> `&str` is the borrowed string type. This type of string can only be 
> created from other strings, unless it is a `&'static str` (see 
> below). It is not possible to move out of borrowed strings because 
> they are owned elsewhere.

Looking into the source, 
[str.rs, Line 47](http://doc.rust-lang.org/src/collections/str.rs.html#47)
confirms that `str` is a *primitive* type. This means we don't get a 
definition like a `struct` or `enum`, nor a `type` alias. The compiler
apparently knows `str` more intimately than it readily admits.

Further down in the docs, we get a section on representation (and
without taxation! Rust certainly is a republican utopia!) containing
the following sentence:

> The actual representation of strs have direct mappings to slices: 
> `&str` is the same as `&[u8]`.

So a `str` is really just a sequence of bytes that are guaranteed to be
valid UTF-8. `&str` thus is a *borrowed* sequence of bytes, while
`String` is...here we draw a blank. We have one piece of the puzzle,
but for the second one we'll have to look in 
[collections::string](http://doc.rust-lang.org/src/collections/string.rs.html#36-38),
which actually defines `String`:

```Rust
pub struct String {
    vec: Vec<u8>,
}
```

So a `String` is just a wrapped `Vec` of bytes, where the available
constructors ensure that the contents are always valid UTF-8.

Now we see that our suspicion was unfounded: `str` and `String` are 
pretty closely related (in fact they share the same relation as a 
slice's *contents* to a `Vec`), but they are not the same person. Case
closed!

So, no harm no foul, right? You haven't told `String` of our little
investigation, have you? *Please* tell me you didn't...

Fine. Not only does lifetime elision want to bite me in the ass, also 
`String` is now out for revenge. If you don't hear from me until next 
week, tell my wife I love her.

**Bonus**: Master investigator diwic gives us the following result of his 
inquiry regarding the shocking connection between `Borrow` and 
`ToOwned` in a 
[/r/rust comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/3ct5yx/blog_holy_stdborrowcow_redux/cszgcil).
