---
title: My Account of the Rhein-Main Rust Meetup
---

Friday 13th I joined the first Rhein-Main Area Rust Meetup in Darmstadt, 
Germany. The Meetup was at [Cowo21](http://cowo21.de) (German site), a coworking 
space. Apart from some difficulty to get a parking spot, it was a good location 
for the meetup, and according to the Organizer, 
[Hanno Braun](http://hannobraun.de), free, which is nice of them.

I was a bit late, and most people had already settled in. Despite Rust being a 
young language, I think I counted about 18 people in the room. That's a great 
response to a first meetup in an area – I remember the first Cologne meetup, 
which I skyped into, was a bit smaller.

We got labels to write our names on. I wrote my first name and my nick so
people would recognize me. Some people did and thanked me for writing this 
blog. Nice to know it's appreciated.

Hanno started the meetup with a Rust introduction, which was a bit short, just 
about 30 minutes. According to him, his first Rust intro was a three-hours 
ordeal, so I understand he tried the opposite approach. He used text editor 
tabs with Rust code as slices, which had the nice benefit that he could call 
`rustc` on a slide to show what it does. I think I'm going to steal this idea 
for a future talk.

There weren't too many questions; people seemed to already know at least a bit 
about Rust. Some people were completely silent, while others were asking 
questions and commenting on the talk.

Next, I held my own [talk](/talks/clippy.html); mostly a high-level overview 
about clippy. I also recommended people to use multirust, compiletest, rustfmt 
where applicable. It just appeared to me that I should have plugged 
[quickcheck](https://github.com/BurntSushi/quickcheck), too. Oh, and clippy is 
also pretty nice. ;-) Of the attendants, only two had used clippy before, and
some seemed to be worrying about having to rustup every two days for it.

The point I tried to drive home is that a) clippy is pretty stable (we only 
have to rustup about every two weeks :-P) and b) you shouldn't feel bad if you 
get clippy warnings; even the rust cracks get some now and then, so you're in 
good company.

While the attendants seemed to be a diverse bunch of people age-, ethnicity- 
and occupation-wise, I only counted one female attendant. During my talk, I 
noticed her starting to ask a question when someone else blurted out another 
question and she either had found her answer or lost the courage to ask. We 
tend to forget that technical meetups can be pretty scary if you are in the 
minority. It's a shame, too, because I'd loved to hear her unique viewpoint on
Rust and the local community. In any event we may want want to improve our 
diversity work. I'm not too experienced in that area, but I'll reach out to
folks I know who are.

Anyway, after the talks we launched into some interesting (and at times 
passionately argued) technical discussions and the adage about time flying like
an arrow certainly rang true. Hanno needed to catch his train about half past
eleven; and I needed to catch some sleep. @Hanno: Thanks again for organizing
the meetup. It has been very cool and I'm looking forward to the next one.
