---
title: An unmatched left parenthesis...
subtitle: ...creates an unresolved tension that will stay with you all day.
---

([relevant XKCD](http://xkcd.com/859/))

Consider the following example:

```Rust
fn main() {
    let x = {
    //Oops, forgot the closing }
    let y = {
    }
}
```

Rust shows the end of file and asks

```
help: did you mean to close this delimiter?
 --> brackets.rs:1:11
  |
1 | fn main() {
  |           ^
```

No, I meant to close the delimiter on line 2! However, because Rust doesn't
take indentation into account, it cannot know that.

Let's assume for the moment we had an indentation-aware Rust; it would simply
keep track of the indentation level of the first non-whitespace character of
a line for each delimiter on that line.

Now we could search each indentation level for delimiters. In our code above,
there are the levels `0` with the bracket order `{`, `}` and `4` (spaces) with the
bracket order `{`, `{`, `}`. Seeing that the latter has an unclosed bracket, we could
correctly report the unclosed bracket on line 2.

The beauty of this is that we don't care if the coder puts brackets on the
beginning or end of the line, because we only care about the indentation on
the first non-whitespace character.

There is a small wrinkle in that the current defaults of rustfmt may sometimes
lead to some rightwards drift that would negate the benefits of this scheme.
Consider the following snippet:

```Rust
let x = frobnicate(Foo {
                        bar: vec![1, 2, 3],
                        baz: true,
                   });
```

In this case the indentation of the closing `{` delimiter would coincide with
the horizontal position after the outer open `(` delimiter. The idea is to
extend our algorithm to have a *set* of possible horizontal positions for each
closing delimiter:

* if the closing delimiter is on the same line, ignore both
* if there is only one opening delimiter on that line, the set only contains
the horizontal position of the first non-whitespace character of that line
* otherwise we need to match the position of the first non-whitespace character
of the line the closing delimiter is in and match either the start of the line
or the position at or directly after any of the opening delimiters

Perhaps by eliminating already matched delimiters, we can reduce the set of
potential matches even more.

Yes, this gets pretty messy, and there are probably corner cases I haven't
thought about, but if it works, we'll have *much* better reporting for that
particular error.

----

Discuss on
[/r/rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/4zjqf1/blog_an_unmatched_left_parenthesis)
or [rust-users](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/blog-an-unmatched-left-parenthesis/7035?u=llogiq).
