---
title: TIL I Suck at Hosting Workshops
---

This is my report from our first Rust Lint Workshop. Short story short: We were
only four people, and I ended up doing all the typing. So what went wrong?

First the low attendance was not a big surprise, because only five people had
accepted and one of them had bailed the last time shortly before our meetup, so
it was kind of expected they'd be missing too. Perhaps I should have advertised
the workshop more, but I also have family and a full-time job.

The second was entirely my fault. I had prepared for talking a bit about how to
write a lint and planned to give them a short rundown and let them figure it
out, meanwhile I'd be running around and give advice where needed.

Instead I let myself talk into live-coding the lint myself, explaining what I 
did while I did it, somehow reducing my attention to what was actually 
happening because I was so preoccupied with both coding and explaining.

Note to self: Next time set an alarm to stop coding/explaining and ask someone 
else to take over the keyboard. At least I made a few typing mistakes which 
were pointed out quickly by those in attendance.

So first I'd like to apologize to Max, Vincent and Hanno, because I feel I've
not been giving them what I should have. I'd also like to thank them to allow
me to learn this lesson – next time, I'll hopefully do it better.

Anyway, we ended up with two half-written lints and three more people who know 
how to write them, so the evening wasn't a full desaster. I'll clean up the 
code and put it on Github when I find the time.

(Incidentially I also fail at blogging, because this post didn't appear on the 
fist try. Go figure. The reason was I mistyped the filename. Thanks 
[killercup](https://github.com/killercup) for helping me out.)
