---
title: Even quicker byte count
---

[Last time](/2016/09/24/newline.html), I thought I'd sped up line counting
(which both [xi](https://github.com/google/xi-editor)-rope and
[ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep) use) pretty good. I had two
versions (one using POPCNT and being faster on newer machines, and one using
old-fashioned bit-hacks running faster on older ones). Along comes the
phenomenal Veedrac and sends a PR with a completely unsafe version that
nonetheless not only works, but smokes every benchmark competitor by a factor
of at least two.

I've never been so happy for being beaten in a performance contest.

Veedrac's code is a tour de force. Pointer arithmetic, array reduction, bit
manipulation, you name it. Like my fastest version, it reduces the count in
steps, but the highest step increment is a whopping *8K*! Not only that, it
manages to squeeze the intermediate count for those 8192 bytes into 4 `usize`s.

Now, how does that work? There's actually a simple trick to it. Apart from
using multiple usizes to keep intermediate counts, unlike my solution in words
instead of bytes, which allows it to add more than 255 values and combining
those counts only when the ~8k bytes have been screamed through.
Hyper-screaming indeed.

Apart from using 4 counters in parallel (which complicates matters just a bit),
the algorithm is as follows:

* Per usize, get the one-bits (via subtraction/masking, as my count did)
* Collect up to 255×8 one-bit values by simple addition
* combine each two bytes into one short word by shift + mask + addition
(this is how it looks like on 64 bit machines, on 32 bit machines, only half
the size is used):

<table>
<tr><th>byte</th><th>0</th><th>1</th><th>2</th><th>3</th><th>4</th><th>5</th><th>6</th><th>7</th></tr>
<tr><th>bytecounts</th><td>c1</td><td>c2</td><td>c3</td><td>c4</td><td>c5</td><td>c6</td><td>c7</td><td>c8</td></tr>
<tr><th>hi masked &gt;&gt; 8</th><td>0</td><td>c1</td><td>0</td><td>c3</td><td>0</td><td>c5</td><td>0</td><td>c7</td></tr>
<tr><th>lo masked</th><td>0</td><td>c2</td><td>0</td><td>c4</td><td>0</td><td>c6</td><td>0</td><td>c8</td></tr>
<tr><th>added</th><td colspan="2">c1+c2</td><td colspan="2">c3+c4</td><td colspan="2">c5+c6</td><td colspan="2">c7+c8</td></tr>
</table>

* Now we have four 16-bit entity per 64-bit word that carry numbers. Note that
the number of each value cannot be more than 256 which means we can add up to
255 of them without overflowing. This is exactly what the algorithm does if the
slice is large enough.
* finally, the counts are reduced by our multiply + shift trick from last time,
only that we multiply by a value that has one bit set per 16bit instead of per
byte (it looks like `0x1000100010001` in hex on 32bit machines, and we get that
number portably by dividing `std::usize::MAX / 0xFFFF`).

Remember we do this by four 64-bit words at once, so each loop iteration counts
eight kilobytes.

Since not all slices are that big, we do another round for 1 kilobyte,
sixtyfour bytes and finally single `usize`s (Note that on 32 bit machine, we
need to half the numbers).

In conclusion: A clever way to use the available bits that I did not see before
allowed Veedrac to amortize the count reductions with much more bytes counted.
No wonder the code is faster.

PS.: I tried reproducing this with much less unsafe code, but couldn't even get
close. So the unsafe code stays for now. I have reviewed and tested the code
and am confident it will run perfectly fine.
