---
title: Fedora 23 LXDE Spin Review + Setup
---

And now for something completely different. A few weeks ago, I ripped out the
spinning platter harddisk from my Lenovo Z510 and transplanted a SSD (the
process was just a tiny bit scary, but worked out well thanks to youtube).

I've been using LUbuntu for a few years now and since I had a blank slate to
play with, I had looked for other distros, finding Fedora Core LXDE spin, which
I installed. From the start, I was impressed with the bootup speed. It looked
like a decent system, too, though some things I was accustomed to from LUbuntu
were missing.

So, since a few weeks have passed, I'm going to review the distribution and of
course share my customizations so others that may find the same things can
use them, too. First, the verdict:

As the main systemd developers work at RedHat, I expected the best low-level
integration possible, and was not let down. The system looks very much like
what an admin would setup for themselves given free reign and enough time. I
like that a firewall is part of the default setup, and that the system forgos
too many downstream patches (as far as I could see).

dnf appears to be faster than apt, and it also appears very solid. The software
selection seems to mostly be pretty new, though I found a few outmodes here and
there.

As well-integrated and -tuned the technical foundations are, the UI can use
some customization. For example, with LUbuntu, muting and raising/lowering
volume by Fn-keys works out of the box (mostly, there's a bug that makes
unmuting fail), whereas pressing those keys on Fedora did nothing. Same with
keyboard shortcuts to quit the session, start a file manager or a terminal
(However, I prefer my own shortcuts for those anyway). Also the touchpad only
reacted on clicks; I rather tap than click for less noise and improved
targetting. I cannot reorder tabs in LXPanel's task bar. mplayer did not stop
the screensaver, so I'd get a blank screen while the movies' sound would
continue every 10 minutes.

I'll come back to solving those things in a minute, for now I should say that
those were really minor niggles. Overall I'm very happy with the system as it
is today, and would recommend Fedora Core LXDE Spin 23 to everyone seeking a
lean, fast and solid distribution.

### WLAN

Setting up the base system was a breeze. The first problem I had was the
broadcom wlan drivers, but installing `akmod` solved this nicely. The system is
pretty bare, but that's what I get for choosing an LXDE spin. I installed
LibreOffice, some programming tools, ΤɛχLive, Pinta, Inkscape and a few other
amenities.

```sh
sudo dnf install SimpleScan sane-backends-drivers-scanners
```

### Touchpad

To get tap-to-click behavior, I first typed `synclient TapButton1=1
TapButton2=3`, but that does not survive a reboot. So here's my
`/usr/share/X11/xorg.conf.d/51-tweaks.conf`:

```
# user settings for synaptics touchpad
Section "InputClass"
        Identifier "SynPS/2 Synaptics TouchPad"
        MatchDriver "synaptics"
        Option "TapButton1" "1"
        Option "TapButton2" "3"
EndSection
```

### Keyboard

Next, keyboard shortcuts. The following openbox configuration snippet takes
care of both volume control and screen brightness control:

```
    <!-- volume control -->
    <keybind key="XF86AudioMute">
      <action name="Execute">
        <command>pactl set-sink-mute alsa_output.pci-0000_00_1b.0.analog-stereo toggle</command>
      </action>
    </keybind>
    <keybind key="XF86AudioLowerVolume">
      <action name="Execute">
        <command>pactl set-sink-volume alsa_output.pci-0000_00_1b.0.analog-stereo -5%</command>
      </action>
    </keybind>
    <keybind key="XF86AudioRaiseVolume">
      <action name="Execute">
        <command>pactl set-sink-volume alsa_output.pci-0000_00_1b.0.analog-stereo +5%</command>
      </action>
    </keybind>
    <!-- monitor brightness -->
    <keybind key="XF86MonBrightnessDown">
      <action name="Execute">
        <command>xbacklight -time 0 -steps 1 -dec 2</command>
      </action>
    </keybind>
    <keybind key="XF86MonBrightnessUp">
      <action name="Execute">
        <command>xbacklight -time 0 -steps 1 -inc 2</command>
      </action>     
    </keybind>
```

### Printer

I wanted to print something, but the system had no printer service by default (I like
this: Some systems really don't need it). So I installed CUPS, but could not add a
printer, CUPS just gave me a "forbidden" message (perhaps some group was
missing?) Installing `system-config-printer` and running it as root let me setup the
printer easily.

### Scanner

Setting up a scanner (I use a flatbed for some tasks) required me to install
both SimpleScan (my weapon of choice) and the `sane-backends-drivers-scanners`
package (because else no scanner could be found). I actually installed
`sane-backends-drivers-cameras` first by mistake, so the first "successful"
scan showed my bemused face as captured by my notebook's webcam.

### Bootup

I don't like waiting for grub, so I put `GRUB_TIMEOUT=0` into
`/etc/defaults/grub` and ran `grub2-mkconfig -o /boot/grub2/grub.cfg`.

### Media

Fedora by itself has incomplete media playback capabilities, however, setting
those up with the help of [RPMFusion](http://rpmfusion.org) isn't too hard. One
small glitch was that, as noted above, mplayer would not disable the
screensaver. Adding a `~/.mplayer/config` file with:

```
heartbeat-command="xscreensaver-command -deactivate > /dev/null"
```

solved the issue.

## The Verdict

Tip of the hat to the Fedora developers – they've created a solid distribution
that I can heartily recommend to others. The above items were simple nits that
were easy to fix (and may not hit other people with different needs or hardware
anyway), and I'm very happy with my current setup.
