---
title: Shave Some Time From Your Travis Builds
---

A lot of projects in the Rustoshpere use [travis](https://travis-ci.org) for 
their continuous integration (CI) builds. The idea behind this is that you let 
them build on every PR and thus can see if something fails before merging, 
theoretically allowing you to keep a working master at all times (I say 
theoretically, because even that may fail in the face of changing dependencies, 
but they're rare for normal projects unlike unstable compiler plugins like 
[clippy](https://github.com/Manishearth/rust-clippy)).

Travis is a Berlin/Germany-based company that thrives by selling their CI build 
superpowers to companies and giving open source projects free access to their 
build platforms. Having used their services for most of my projects, I can 
attest to their general awesomeness. The way you setup their build is to 
register with their service and add a `travis.yml` file into your project 
containing the setup. For Rust projects, the minimum file will be:

```yaml
language: Rust
```

That is enough to get you a plain build+test cycle. Travis can also be 
configured to upload docs (see Huon Wilson's 
[travis-cargo](https://github.com/huonw/travis-cargo)), or do whatever you 
would do in a shell. Good stuff.

However, all that awesome power for free can make one forget that they have to 
burn cycles to build our stuff, and also the less time it takes to build the 
faster we can merge new features into our projects. So there's some motivation 
to make the builds perform as fast as possible. Here are three general hints to 
make the builds fast:

### 1. Use container-based builds if possible

Unless you need to be root (and if you do, you may want to stop and think if 
you can change your build to remove that requirement) you can add `sudo: false` 
to your `.travis.yml`. This will speed up your build considerably (although I 
don't have numbers, I remember noticing the speedup when making the switch for 
[optional](https://github.com/llogiq/optional)).

### 2. Cache cargo dependencies

With the line `cache: cargo` in your `.travis.yml`, travis will remember the 
contents of your `$CARGO_HOME`, so that you only need to recompile dependencies 
if they or the compiler were upgraded. For some dependency-heavy projects, this 
can make quite the difference.

### 3. Only build what you need

If you just want to test, you don't need a release build (unless your tests are 
so massive that running them from a debug build is slower than building a 
release build + running them there). If you want to benchmark, you don't need a 
debug build (you can `cargo test --release` to stop building two separate 
builds). Know what compiler/cargo flags change build behavior. For example, `-C 
debug-assertions=on` enables debug assertions (including integer overflow 
checking) even on release builds. To reliably do this with cargo, you can call 
`cargo * --verbose` (where `*` is any of the other commands, usually `build`, 
`test` or `doc`) and copy the respective `rustc` commands into your build. You 
can then use `cargo rustc -- ..` to add the same flags to your build when using 
cargo.

