---
title: Comparing Rust and Java
---

*This post compares Rust-1.8.0 nightly to OpenJDK-1.8.0_60*

It may not be obvious from my other blog entries, but I work as a Java
developer. I also freely confess to enjoy it, which probably makes me part of
some minority.

However, if you've been reading some of my other posts, you'll be hard-pressed
to overlook the fact that I *really* enjoy programming in Rust, too. So, given
that I am both Rust- and Java-savvy, why not compare both and see where we
end up?

# History

Java began it's life as *Oak*. Early versions which already carried the Java
moniker floated around in 1995, the 1.0 release is dated January 1996. This
makes Java more than twenty years old now! The early goals were (mostly)
portability, simplicity and robustness. It was conceived as a low-level
garbage-collected bytecode-interpreted, object-oriented language. Early
implementations were slow as molasses and ate a lot of memory. The former
problem can considered to be mostly solved by now.

Those were the early days of the internet, and Java was billed as "the
programming language for the Web", applets and all. This didn't quite work out
as planned, though the name of the language that runs on web clients today used
to start with 'Java'. Even so, a lot of the infrastructure of the Web we have
today runs on Java server-side.

Rust 1.0 was a good bit longer in development (and most of the history can be
seen on GitHub, which goes back to 2010) and was released in May 2015. Graydon
Hoare who started the project has gone on record saying he actually started
working on Rust in private around 2008. Since 2010, Mozilla has taken it upon
themselves to sponsor the development, along with setting up the Servo project,
which aims to create a modern browser engine in Rust.

The Rust developers iterated a lot on the design, lots of things were thrown in
and fell out again. Earlier versions of Rust had green threads, and Garbage
Collection was removed from the language during the 0.8 cycle if I recall
correctly. While the fast iteration was off-putting to early users, together
with the open discussion culture it enabled a very thorough and considerate
design.

# The Runtime

The first obvious difference between Rust and Java is that the latter runs on
the JVM, so it's just-in-time compiled. This means that Java can benefit from
profile-based optimizations that in theory allow better performance than
compile-time optimized code *for some workloads*. For my job, I've rewritten
the hottest code from my in-house tool in C and found that the performance
difference was too small to be measurable. So while some
[benchmarks](http://benchmarksgame.alioth.debian.org/u64q/compare.php?lang=rust&lang2=java)
show Rust comfortably in the lead (in fact I wrote the only Rust benchmark on
that page that is slower than the Java version, and have long since suggested a
much faster version, which alas has not been included on the site at the time
of this writing), I would not bet on measurable differences for any workload
prior to measurement.

One thing that I *will* bet on is that for most workloads that matter, a
typical Rust program will consume orders of magnitude less memory than a
typical Java program.

Still, having *similar* performance in many workloads despite Java having a fat
runtime shows that the JVM team has some serious engineering chops.

As it stands now, Java doesn't monomorphize (at least not at compile time,
though the JIT may synthesize specialized versions of hot code), while Rust
does. This leads to smaller binaries for Java, although that advantage is
usually eaten up by runtime overhead.

Java's GC is *very* optimized, and should be considered world-class. While it
doesn't solve all problems Rust's ownership system is designed to solve, it
makes programming fairly painless. Tuning it is a complex exercise, however.
Also in hot code, High Performance Java developers usually try hard not to
allocate to keep the runtime impact of the GC manageable, sometimes resulting
in byzantine code.

Rust on the other hand has a zero-sized runtime, for some large values of zero.
Actually there *is* a runtime, but it consists of setting up landing pads for
panics, and even that can be overridden for e.g. embedded or OS development.

As a fully compiled language, Rust isn't as portable as Java (in theory), but
as it is LLVM based, backends for many targets can be obtained with reasonable
effort. More, the absence of a fat runtime and garbage collector makes Rust
suitable for targets which are deemed too small for the JVM.

# Lifetimes and Ownership

On the other hand, Rust can get by without a GC because of it's lifetime- and
ownership rules, which are upheld (outside of `unsafe` blocks) by the borrow
checker, sometimes affectionately called `borrowck`.

This is something Java doesn't have and it gives Rustaceans a whole new set of
both benefits and headaches. The former because the compiler will ensure
freedom from data-races, `ConcurrentModificationException`s and other things
that can plague java codebases. The latter because at some point everyone
learning Rust will bash their head against the borrow checker and ask the Rust
gods why their finely handcrafted lifetime annotations fail to pass its muster.

The rules are actually quite simple: You can have a plain value (which you can
do anything to, except dropping it while borrowed), exactly one mutable xor as
many immutable borrows as you like. Borrows end in the reverse order of taking
them, which means sometimes switching statements can appease the borrow
checker.

It all gets a bit more complex when you take references as part of types,
because then the types usually have to be generic over some lifetimes. I won't
delve into that here, there has been written short and long and eloquently
about it. Just remember that when you see `'a: 'b`, it means that whatever has
the lifetime `'a` must live *longer* than something that has the lifetime `'b`.

Unfortunately, while the concepts have been around for at least two decades, it
is new to have them formalized in such a stringent fashion. So while the error
messages are somewhat helpful (and for the record, their helpfulness wanes with
the introduction of more generics), it takes some time to understand them.

Even with the steeper learning curve and the marginally longer compile times,
borrow checking is a great win, because while it may seem overly restrictive
and ceremony-laden at times, it catches real bugs that you could conceivably
miss in Java even with a good test suite.

I'd like to add that despite those seemingly large differences, the memory
models of Java and Rust are surprisingly similar.

# Types

Java's primitive types are a subset of Rust's (there are no unsigned integer
types, and Rust gives us more leeway to include e.g. SIMD types). Having all
objects stored as references leads to pointer chasing galore, though the
well-implemented escape analysis will reduce some of the pain in practice. This
also explains why Java utilizes the heap much more than Rust, because Objects
usually live on the heap (barring off-heap stuff that has become en vogue in
certain circles).

Java's integral operations are wrapping (and there is no overflow check),
whereas Rust's are checked in debug mode and undefined on overflow (though
currently wrapping in practice) in release mode.

Rust has tuple types built in, which makes it easy to return multiple values
without overhead. In Java, returning a `Pair<A, B>` is always a bit icky (and
comes with reference-chasing overhead). Value types in Java are slated to bring
it more in line with the lower level languages, but I hear they've been pushed
to Java 10, if not later.

Rust's array types carry their size in the type. However, creating arrays of
some size determined at runtime isn't possible without some evil hacks.
Rustaceans tend to use `Vec`s for this, which are comparable to Java's
`ArrayList` (if only those would work for primitive types).

Both Rust and Java keep their generics to compile time. Rust's type system is a
lot mightier than Java's; in fact it's Turing capable (one can build arbitrary
type structures out of zero-sized-types). Rust also uses its generics to
communicate lifetime information.

Java has pervasive `null`s – every non-primitive Object can be `null` simply
due to the fact that they are referenced. Again, value types will reduce the
scope of possible nullness, but we'll be waiting for them for some time.

Rust's `enum`s are sum types, whereas Java's `enum`s are simple values akin to
integers. On the other hand, Java's `enum` values are really singleton classes
under the hood – so one can define an abstract method in the `enum` to
implement differently in each value, something that would require a `match`
expression (or hash-table, whose construction at compile time some enterprising
Rustaceans have built a [crate](https://github.com/sfackler/rust-phf) for) in
Rust.

Java's primitive types have automatic widening coercion, so that you can put an
`int` into a method that takes `long`. Rust only has "deref coercion" which
means that on dereferencing (which the dot operator will do implicitly, or you
can do explicitly with the `*` prefix operator) the trait implementations are
queried for a `Deref` implementation with an appropriate `Target` type.

However, the Rust community has declared excessive use of this an antipattern,
and Rust code usually has explicit type conversions. Consequently, it is
usually easy to determine the type of any expression without looking too far,
despite method-wide type inference, which also has the effect that you
sometimes see absurdly long method signatures for a one-liner method. I think
the locality of semantics is worth it, though. You usually need not look far to
understand a Rust method, whereas Java code can sometimes look quite opaque.

All in all, the more thorough type system, borrow- and other checks, along with
immutability by default and the absence of a good number of footguns mean Rust
code is usually more robust than Java code written in roughly the same time. In
other words: It may be harder to write Rust code than Java code, but it's *a
lot harder* to write *incorrect* Rust code than *incorrect* Java code.

This has the effect that when `rustc` compiles code, it usually runs on first
try. Besides Rust, only OCamML or Haskell give me such confidence in my code,
and both are markedly higher level.

# Java has Class, Rust has Trait

Java has *class*. I'd go as far as saying it has `class`. `class`es, even. It
also has `interface`s, which with the latest version have gained the ability to
define `default` methods.

I probably don't need to reiterate that Java's classes bind data and behavior
together (encapsulation), control visibility, inherit from other classes,
implement interfaces and so on. Everything in Java (apart from primitive types
and possibly `null`) is an `Object` (and thus belongs to a `Class`). Even if
it's just a bag of static methods.

Also classes correspond to types. This multitude of responsibilities classes
have makes them the center piece of Java's structure.

Rust on the other hand has `trait`s, which are eerily similar to Java 8's
interfaces. Then it has types (usually `struct`s and/or `enum`s) and
`impl`ementations of traits `for` types. It also has *inherent*
`impl`ementations (of types for themselves). Finally the visibility is usually
determined by the module (which is akin to a java package, though the latter is
only a collection of classes and possibly sub-packages).

This separation of data and behavior may seem strange at first, but it's
actually pretty clever, because it makes *composition* of data types very
natural, and it's possible to create new traits that add behavior to existing
types, which is impossible in Java.

Rust also has free-standing functions, which just live in their module. This
means less ceremony when writing procedural code. No more `public class
HelloWorld`.

Rust's separation of data and behavior promotes a sort of data-oriented
programming where you first set up your data structures and then structure the
behavior around it.

# Patterns and SOLID

Both Rust and Java lack named arguments like in Python, so both use the Builder
pattern to . Apart from that, Java seems more pattern-happy than Rust,
presumably because the latter is still young and hasn't grown so many patterns.
Also many of the amusing patterns of yore
(`AbstractCompositeStrategyBeanFactoryFactory` anyone?) are no longer relevant
to Java thanks to the recent functional influences in Java 8.

Many Java programmers embrace the SOLID principles, which still require some
patterns to be adhered in Java. To reiterate, **S**ingle-Responsibility,
**O**pen(to extension)-Closed(to modification), **L**iskov Substitution,
**I**nterface segregation and **D**ependency inversion.

At times, this can make applications and libraries seem over-engineered, where
the call graph zig-zags back and forth through multiple levels of objects that
each mediate some part of the functionality. Especially in enterprise-y code,
there is a pull in that direction. Luckily the pendulum currently swings the
other way, favoring simplicity over code reuse.

Another current trend in the Java world is to forgo implementation inheritance
in favor of composition of objects and delegating the relevant methods. Though
it produces more boilerplate code, it allows for finer control over the API and
Projects like [lombok](https://projectlombok.org) greatly reduce the pain by
auto-generating the boilerplate following an annotation (for example `@Data`
creates a constructor, getters and setters for all attributes, `equals(_)`,
`.hashCode()` and `.toString()`, all in all quite a bit of code).

In Rust, trait coherence (and especially the orphan rule) basically mandates
the open-closed principle by design. Interface segregation and Dependency
inversion can be done with traits but often requires either generics, which
make the code more complex or trait objects, which have a runtime overhead that
Rustaceans aren't usually willing to pay. Single responsibility and Liskov
substitution rely on the vigilance of the programmer in both languages.

# Flow control

The following table shows how different flow control constructs relate between
the languages:

|Rust                           |Java                               |
|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
|`break` / `break 'label`       |`break` / `break label`            |
|`continue` / `continue 'label` |`continue` / `continue label`      |
|`for i in 0..n { _ }` (¹)      |`for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) { _ }`|
|`for i in _ { _ }`             |`for (X i : _) { _ }`              |
|`if _ { _ } else { _ }`        |`if (_) { _ } else { _ }`          |
|`if let _ = _ { _ } else { _ }`|`if (_ = _) { _ } else { _ }`      |
|`loop { _ }`                   |`while (true) { _ }`               |
|`loop { .. ; if _ { break; }}` |`do { .. } while (_);`             |
|`match _ { .. }`               |`switch (_) { .. }` (²)            |
|`return _`                     |`return _`                         |
|`while _ { _ }`                |`while (_) { _ }`                  |
|`while let _ = _ { _ }`        |`while (_ = _) { _ }`              |

¹ This obviously only works for simple ranges. Otherwise we'd probably be
writing a `while` loop.

² Java's `switch` statement is both less powerful than the fully destructuring
pattern matching of Rust's `match` and has surprising fallthrough between
`case` statements (I have my IDE warn on this to mitigate the surprise).

Note that this list is incomplete, and some things don't completely match for
all cases. Most of Rust's constructs are in fact syntactic sugar for various
combinations of `loop` and `match` statements. In Java, the `for`-each loops
compile to iterator-based `for`-loops in the style of `for (Iterator<_> i = _;
i.hasNext();) { _ v = i.next(); _ }`.

So in short, Rust has done away with the C-like `for` loops. Since assignments
don't return a value (`a = b = c` is not valid in Rust), the `if let` and
`while let` forms take care of this use case. This makes those cases more
obvious and less prone to `if (x = y)` errors (though in fairness, most Java
IDEs catch those, too).

Rust's syntactic sugar along with the ridiculously powerful destructuring
`match` makes it feel a bit higher-level than Java in some places, but the
compiler still manages to produce very tight code based on it, mostly thanks to
LLVM, which the Rust compiler uses to produce code.

# Error handling

Java has Exceptions, which come in two flavors: Checked and Unchecked. The
former are meant for probable failure modes that can be either directly handled
by the caller or bubbled up (by declaring your method `throws` them) the call
chain. The latter are meant for programmer error, which is usually seen as
unrecoverable.

One instance of the latter is the often dreaded `NullPointerException` or the
only slightly less terrible `IndexOutOfBoundsException` (inluding
specializations): Every operation that dereferences an Object can throw
`NullPointerException`. It's so bad that "NPE" is a known abbreviation to many
working in Java. Mostly, it'll be clear which operation caused it, but
sometimes long lines may obstruct the offending operations.

*Every* Exception can be caught, which can lead newbies to `catch Throwable {}`
just to get rid of the annoying stack traces. Which of course is the wrong
thing to do; as I said before, runtime exceptions should usually not be caught.

Some people think that checked exceptions are bad and that all exceptions
should be unchecked. I personally disagree, but I won't waste time arguing.

Rust as it is now has thread-bounded "panics" which can be considered
RuntimeExceptions that will kill the thread and can only be "caught" from
another thread and some syntactic sugar to work with `Result` types, which
closely resembles the monadic error handling known from Haskell and other
functional languages.

The upside is that handling errors becomes a much more specific thing – one
can see at a glance which expressions are possibly error bearing (formerly
those would be wrapped in a `try!(_)` macro invocation, recently an RFC with
syntactic sugar was accepted, so those will look like `_?` in the near future.

It's also possible to `unwrap` a `Result` to convert any errors into panics.
This is often used during prototyping, but is frowned upon in production code
(there is even a third party lint against it).

The downside is that "bubbling up" errors is no longer as easy as slapping a
`throws SomeException` on the function declaration. The return type of the
function must be changed to some `Result<T, E>` type (where `E` is the error if
the function fails and `T` is the result otherwise). All error-bearing
functions must be invoked with a `?` postfix (which desugars to a `match` over
the `Result`), and some error types may be incompatible, leading to either
boxed errors (which are basically trait objects of the `std::error::Error`
trait) or wrappers upon wrappers that must be destructured to get at the cause.

In practice it appears to work out quite well.

# Functions && Closures

Java has lambdas! Finally! They don't look as powerful as Rust's closures,
which can modify the captured environment in accordance with Rust's ownership
rules. Still, they work reasonably well for most cases. The same goes for
function handles. `interface`s with one method are automatically implemented by
all functions whose types match that method, which is nice (apart from some
wrinkles).

Rust's functions implicitly implement some `Fn*() -> _` types and so can be
used in various settings without even require heap allocation. The caller has
to work with the given type bounds, which usually requires some generics
gymnastics. Still, one can call the strategy more principled than Java's.

Java's streams offer a low-cost way to data-parallelize computations. Rust
itself doesn't have this, but [Rayon](https://github.com/nikomatsakis/rayon)
offers parallel iterators that have comparable cost-benefit characteristics.
There are many other third-party crates aimed at parallelism and concurrency.

Java dispatches functions based on argument types. This is done internally by
mangling the function name to include the signature, like e.g.
`next()Lllogiq.example.Example`. Rust doesn't do this: A function always takes
one set of arguments, though generics can widen the possible set of types in
the signature, e.g. `some_func<S: Into<String>>(s: S)`.

I think that the Rust designers have made a good call here: Having methods of
the same name that do completely different things based on type is generally
frowned upon. If I do have multiple versions of a method in Java, I usually
want them to do roughly the same. For those cases, it's simple enough to either
figure out the generics or have differently-named functions. On the other hand,
dispatching methods based on types can lead to confusing interactions. For
example, just recently I had a bug, because an output utility class was
silently coercing `short`s to `int`s on writing.

Conversely, Java shuns operator overloading, while Rust implements it using
traits (in `std::ops`), which removes some avenues for error (`oneString ==
otherString` anyone?), while introducing others (is `a == &b` the same as `&a
== b`? What about `&a == &b`?). The set of operators is basically the same in
Rust and Java, though Rust has shuffled the precedence a bit to be less
surprising with regards to `&`, `|` and comparisons.

# Metaprogramming

Rust has both procedural and bang-macros. The former are Rust programs that
rewrite token trees, whereas the latter are a form of quasiquoting template
language. Also as described above, the type system can be misused to do
interesting things.

In contrast, Java has a few libraries to create byte code at runtime which can
then be fed to the class loader. Some of them are even quite nice to use (cue
shout-out to [Byte Buddy](http://bytebuddy.net/) creator Rafael Winterhalter)
Considering that Java can synthesize code at runtime, it's surprising that it
isn't done more often. Then again, a lot of code runs well without any byte
code injection.

As for annotations, Java has better support for program metadata than Rust for
now. This ties into the tooling, which we will come to later. Time will tell if
Rust catches up.

# Interfacing with other languages

In a perfect world, every language could simply call every other. This is
obviously not the case, but the C Application Binary Interface (ABI) has
emerges as a common denominator most languages can target. As does Java, with
its Java Native Interface (JNI). There's a `javah` tool that will generate C
headers and stubs from a Java class with "native" methods. Some work needs to
be done to adapt C interfaces to what JNI requires, and there is the persistent
rumor that it was designed to keep developers from reaching down to native code
too often. Also there is some overhead related to GC (because the function has
to give objects it no longer uses back to the GC, lest the object is lost in a
memory leak). Native code must live on the java library path to be loaded into
an application.

Rust can more or less interface directly with C by allowing to define `extern
"C"` functions. The compiler will then assume C ABI for those. There are some
wrinkles related to ownership, lifetimes and types, because native code by
definition cannot uphold Rust's guarantees by itself, so usually there is some
wrapping going on, to present a safe and rustic interface. There also is a
crate that allows embedding some subset of C++ in Rust directly, but I have
neither found the time nor the need to test it.

Rust obviously has the benefit of being lower level and needing less gymnastics
to interface with C. If the Java designers really feared that people would go
native too often, their worry was probably unfounded, because Java does pretty
well by itself.

# The Standard Library

Java's standard library contains a great deal of stuff from `Annotation`s to
`ZipOutputStream`s – and beyond. While only almost as `batteries included` as
Python, you can do a great many things using nothing but `java.*` and `javax.*`
(and some `org.*`, which is also included).

Java never throws things away. Thus the API has three UI toolkits (AWT, Swing
and JavaFX), both `Enumeration` and `Iterator` interfaces (which mostly do the
same thing), two sets of IO classes (`java.io` and `java.nio`, though I'll
admit the latter builds upon the former) and other interesting thingamajigs.

On the plus side, this makes java code extremely long-lived – during JavaLand
2015, Marcus Lagergren showed a Java 1.0 applet that was still running (though
with Java 9, this example will no longer work, because applets are finally on
the way out).

Java's official APIs tend to be surprise-free and are usually extremely
thoroughly documented. Rust is close behind however, thanks to the amazing work
of Steve Klabnik who has been hired by Mozilla as a documentation maven for
Rust.

Rust's library is lean and keen. There are a few collection classes, a fair
amount of string handling, smart references and cells, basic concurrency
support, some IO/network and minimal OS integration. That's it. The result is
that Rust code will usually rely on a lot of third-party libraries, which
however are very easily obtained and managed. The good thing here is that no
one needs to download a set of MIDI classes just because they want to write a
JSON parser — or vice versa.

Owing to Rust's low-level nature, it often also has to split up operations
which are the same in Java, because it matters if something is owned or
borrowed (or can be owned, or need to be owned, etc.) – this leads to a
diversity of iterators, for example: Where Java `Iterable`s have an
`.iterator()` method, Rust will have '.iter()' (iterate immutably borrowed) and
`.iter_mut()` (iterate mutably borrowed) and sometimes even `.drain(..)`
(iterate by value, optionally removing or replacing elements). There also are a
number of helper traits to make the most of the type system (I've
[written](https://llogiq.github.io/2015/07/30/traits.html) about them already).

Rust's API docs allow offline keyword search, which is nice if you know what to
look for. That many types mediate their behavior through a dozen traits hinders
discoverability somewhat. On the other hand, once you know your traits, you can
do amazing things with them.

One is also usually able to combine Rust's standard types; it's not uncommon to
see a `Rc<RefCell<Vec<T>>>`. Type aliases are used in many places to reduce the
amount of boilerplate. [Manish Goregaokar](https://manishearth.github.io) has
[written](http://manishearth.github.io/blog/2015/05/27/wrapper-types-in-rust-choosing-your-guarantees/)
a good piece on how to choose the right combination of wrapper types.

Despite being dwarfed in size by the Java APIs, the Rust standard library is
already surprisingly capable. A portion of the API is marked as `unstable`,
which means it's only usable with a *nightly* compiler and some
`#![feature(_)]` annotation. This allows the library team to iterate on API
design quickly while upholding stability guarantees. On the other hand, it also
limits the usefullness of e.g. `BTreeMap`s, as there are a good number of
methods missing in release-version Rust. This will very probably improve with
time.

# Tooling

Java's tooling has matured for decades, so it's top notch as should be
expected. There are uncountable IDEs, build tools, code analysis tools,
deployment and operations tools, profilers, coverage collectors, benchmarking
frameworks, documentation, debuggers, etc., many of them free as in speech or
at least as in beer.

However, this also leads to some fragmentation – take three Java coders and ask
them to show their coding setup and you will likely see wildly different
environments. Some companies mandate IDEs and a set of libraries/frameworks to
use to counteract this.

Rust hasn't yet had much time to fragment (though some crates are distinctly
similar), and the tooling isn't as mature as with Java. Still, Cargo gets build
and package management just right – I wish I could use it in Java. With racer,
I can at least get code completion, though the Rust core team has touted this
year as the year of Rust IDE. We'll see how this pans out.

# Community and Development

One thing to say about the Java community is that it's **HUGE**. There are so
many people working with it that at least here in Europe you will struggle to
find an acre of land without at least one Java developer in it. The same goes
for the ecosystem: Whatever you need, chances are someone already wrote a
library to do it. Java's ecosystem is quite framework-happy, which to some is a
downside.

Java has an air of professionalism. Big companies use it. You can comfortably
(and profitably!) program it while wearing a suit and tie (source: I did for
some years). That doesn't mean that fun is prohibited, though, and Java folks
usually tend to be a cheerful bunch. But when you talk business, we're on it.

In many discussions invariably some troll will enter to declare Java dead,
outdated or legacy software. Well, I gotta say from here it looks pretty
healthy. By the same token, there are some who argue that Rust will never be
ready for prime time. More than 25 million downloaded crates on
[crates.io](https://crates.io) speak a very different language.

I immensely enjoy taking part in the Rust community. The community is much
smaller than Java's, but there are so many adroit, friendly, helpful, savvy and
funny people that brighten my day with every interaction, it doesn't matter.
Some say they have been repelled by the adherence to a Code of Conduct, but I
have yet to see an objection to any particular part of the code and I believe
the results speak for themselves.

The development of Java is mostly directed by Oracle. Given that Java is used
in production in a lot of big companies, the development pace is fairly good,
though because they need to care for so many different usage scenarios it
understandably cannot match the speed that Rust is developed with. Delays
between major versions vary, the longest was five years before 1.7 arrived,
while nowadays we see new versions roughly every two years. In contrast, new
Rust versions arrive every six weeks (though the changes are usually not as
dramatic as between Java versions).

Rust is the underdog in this comparison, but they've put up a great fight so
far. Though much smaller in size, the Rust community makes up for lack of
numbers through agility, smarts and focus. That they have a great language at
their disposal also helps.

# Summing Up

Java has a lot going for it, and I probably will keep using it for some time.
Likewise I'll be a Rustacean for the foreseeable future. Both have their
respective strengths and weaknesses, both have a great future ahead and (I
think) both communities can learn from each other.
