---
title: Java Code Golf
---

<div style="border: 2px solid red; background: #faa; padding: 1ex;"><b>WARNING</b>: DON'T DO THIS AT WORK!</div>


If you've read other entries on this blog, you've probably noticed that I get my
jollies in strange places (as, for example the Rust 
[type system](/2015/12/12/types.html). Today at the 
[JavaLand](https://www.javaland.eu) conference, I took part in the Code Golf contest
and won with two of my three Java entries.

Java? Yes, you read that right. The contest was split into Java and other JVM
languages, because as everyone and their cat knows, Java is very chatty, so a
direct comparison, to JavaScript or Groovy would be unfair.

Setting that aside, if we restrict ourselves to a Java solution, how bad is it
actually as a golfing language? How good can we get? Turns out it isn't as bad
as most make it out to be – yes, you'll have some boilerplate, but you still can
twitter some Java programs that do interesting things.

For example, Who'd have thought that one could write a complete Java program to 
write the Dates of all Fridays in 2016 in 112 bytes, including 5 spaces (which 
weren't counted to allow people to send in formatted code, so this would've 
clocked in at 107 non-space chars).

Here's the code (co-produced with Mark Lorenz, who shaved off eignt bytes from
my original submission):

```java
interface D{static void main(String[]a){for(int i=372;i>7;)System.out.println(new java.sql.Date(116,0,i-=7));}}
```

What's that? An *interface*? Are we even allowed to do that? Shouldn't the Java
police come and revoke our JVM licenses now? Well, actually no. I started out
with `class D{public static void main(...`, but using an `interface`, we can
omit the `public` visibility specifier, because all interface members are
public by default, saving us 2 characters. The next trick we pulled was to use a
deprecated constructor of `java.sql.Date` that takes *year-1900*, *month-1* and
*day* (of month), but is quite lenient in the actual values it takes.

Update: An earlier version counted from 1 upwards, but Mark saved another char 
by counting downwards, because we can put the step into the `Date` constructor.

Another surprising one was Mark's entry (which unsurprisingly won) for the 
Fibonacci sequence from 1..50:

```java
interface F{static void main(String[]v){for(long a=1,b=1;a<2e10;b=a+(a=b))System.out.println(a);}}
```

This clocks in at **98** chars including 4 spaces, so 94 non-whitespace chars.
Apart from the interface trick to reduce boilerplate, it pulls three ingenious 
tricks to get away with only two variables and a curly-brace-less `for` loop:

1. The loop comparison compares `a` with `2e10`. If you look at the Fibonacci
sequence, you'll notice that the fifteeth fibonacci number is 12,586,269,025, 
while the fifty-first is 20,365,011,074 (or roughly 2*10^10 plus a few). So by
comparing to `2e10`, we get away without an extra loop variable.
2. The loop update is used to actually do the calculation, so we can use the 
single-statement loop body for printing the value, getting rid of two curly 
braces.
3. That calculation is one combined assignment of a and b: `b=a+(a=b)` Let's 
pull it apart and see what it means: The `(a=b)` returns `b` and sets `a` to 
`b`, whereas the outer `b=a+(b)` uses the fact that Java's operator argument 
evaluation order is defined letf-to-right to add the former value of `a` to 
`b`, (while setting `a` to the former value of `b`. Even a scripting language 
with multiple assignment would come out worse here.

Kudos to Mark for this masterpiece.

The last of the contests tasks was to produce a minimal program that takes a
value from the program arguments and write out the factorial (*n!*) of this
number. After the contest, I sat down with Mark to shave off some characters
from my entry, bringing it to **99** non-whitespace characters:

```java
interface I{static void main(String[]v){int a=1,i=new Byte(v[0]);for(;i>0;a*=i--);System.out.print(a);}}
```

This uses two neat tricks to reduce the length: 

1. Parsing the input into a number: We make use of the fact that 16! or fully
written 2004189184 is the greatest factorial number that fits into an `int`. So
we get much shorter than `Integer.parseInt(v[0])` which others would have used
by creating a `Byte` instance with the value, which is then auto-unboxed into a
`byte` automatically, which is then automatically widened to an `int` by the
assignment to `i`.
2. As with Mark's Fibonacci program, we do the computation the update statement
of the `for` loop – it multiplies our accumulator `a` with the current `i` and
decreases the latter by one. The result is that we can get by without curlies
for the loop.

As a farewell present I offer you an adaptation of the "labyrinth" that used to 
be popular on the Commodore C64:

```java
interface L{static void main(String[]a){for(;;)System.out.print(Math.random()>.5?"/ ":"\\ ");}}
```

This is 95 characters, including 5 spaces (to be fair, two of those are part of
string constants, on the other hand, the chars on the C64 would make it look
good without the spaces), so we clock in at 90 non-whitespace characters.

This shows two techniques to keep the codebase lean (if you can speak of a code 
base here):

1. The `for(;;)` loop for an infinite loop. Usually, I'd write this as 
`while(true)`, so this shaves off 4 bytes.
2. We need a random boolean to print either slashes or backslashes, so we'll
just check `Math.random()`, which returns a double between 0 and 1 if the result
is larger than ½. This is obviously shorter than `new Random().nextBoolean()` or
`ThreadLocalRandom.getCurrent().nextBoolean()`.

Unsurprisingly, all of those examples could be a lot shorter using a scripting
language. In fact the winning entries (in Groovy and Javascript) of the contest
were between 35 and 42 non-whitespace characters. Still, with a number of tricks
one can write a lot of interesting Java programs that will fit in a tweet.

----

Think that code golfing is an evil distraction? Or want to share a technique I
missed? Then discuss over at
[/r/java](https://www.reddit.com/r/java/comments/49qhu0/blog_java_code_golf/).
