---
title: Counting Newlines Really Fast
---

Looking into [xi editor](https://github.com/google/xi-editor)'s rope crate, I
found a
[method](https://github.com/google/xi-editor/blob/954aaa593637064009bb8e64f0a5e9a0fdcca57d/rust/rope/src/lib.rs#L133-L136)
with a nice nerd-snipey (obligatory [XKCD](https://www.xkcd.com/356/)) comment,
which I will reproduce here in full so you don't have to chase the link and
find back:

```Rust
// TODO: explore ways to make this faster - SIMD would be a big win
fn count_newlines(s: &str) -> usize {
    s.as_bytes().iter().filter(|&&c| c == b'\n').count()
}
```

I remembered [Bit Twiddling Hacks' zero byte detection](https://graphics.stanford.edu/~seander/bithacks.html#ZeroInWord),
and thought it would be nice to try and use it to optimize this method.

```Rust
// one 1 in each byte
const LO : usize = ::std::usize::MAX / 255;
// one 128 in each byte
const HI : usize = LO * 128;

// bit twiddling ahoy
fn count_zero_bytes(x: usize) -> usize {
    ((x.wrapping_sub(LO)) & !x & HI) / 128 % 255
}
```

The modulo operation actually counts the bits here, because 256 modulo 255 is
one, all multiples of powers of 256 are conflated into ones, and then added.
Some examples:

<table>
<tr><th>X</th><th>X in hex</th><th>X % 255</th></tr>
<tr><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr>
<tr><td>256</td><td>100</td><td>1</td></tr>
<tr><td>257</td><td>101</td><td>2</td></tr>
<tr><td>65536</td><td>10000</td><td>1</td></tr>
<tr><td>65792</td><td>10100</td><td>2</td></tr>
<tr><td>65793</td><td>10101</td><td>3</td></tr>
<tr><td>16843009</td><td>1010101</td><td>4</td></tr>
<tr><td>72340172838076673</td><td>101010101010101</td><td>8</td></tr>
</table>

To use this, we only need to *xor* the values with repeated newlines before
counting. Perf looked good (about twice as fast at 10k chars), so I pushed a
[PR](https://github.com/google/xi-editor/pull/122) to xi.

[Andrew Gallant](https://github.com/BurntSushi) left a comment outlining his
and [bluss](https://github.com/bluss)' implementation of the same algorithm,
using the `.count_ones()` method to great effect on systems that have the
POPCNT instruction.

```Rust
fn count_zero_bytes(x: usize) -> usize {
    ((x.wrapping_sub(LO)) & !x & HI).count_ones()
}
```

Unfortunately there are some *really* slow implementations out there, so it's
not a clear win. In any case, POPCNT can count *all* sixty-four bits, whereas
our method only looks at up to eight of them. Before we pessimize the code for
machines that need a more complex shim, there is one possible optimization with
a shift + multiply:

```Rust
fn count_zero_bytes(x: usize) -> usize {
    (((x.wrapping_sub(LO)) & !x & HI) / 128).wrapping_mul(LO)
        >> ((USIZE_BYTES - 1) * 8)
}
```

Remember that `LO` has a value of `1` at each byte, so after multiplying with
it, the highest byte contains the sum of all bytes prior to multiplication. The
shift just gets the value of that highest byte.

This improves matters for machines that don't have POPCNT, but is slower on
current (e.g. 6th or 7th gen) hardware, which has a fast implementation, so
it's not a clear win either. But remember that POPCNT counts all bits. Could we
use more of the 64 bits to amortize the bit counting better?

Of course we can. I started by pulling the `.count_ones()` out of the method
and using shifts to distribute the resulting bits from our two `usize`s so that
one count operation would suffice. Nice speedup so far.

Next, I doubled the words we read per loop (four instead of two), again
shifting the bits to different positions so they would count independently.
This sped up the code even more. So why stop there? I doubled the words again
(now we read 64 bytes per loop), and lo and behold, I shaved off another 25%. I
also added some code to look at single `usize`s (because this would still be
faster than looking at each byte).

But can we do without POPCNT and still be faster? Turns out we can. Because our
custom operation (`.wrapping_mul(LO) >> ((USIZE_BYTES - 1) * 8)` in case you
forgot) *adds* the individual bytes, armed with the knowledge that the maximum
value of this addition is 64 (because we can never get more than 64 newlines in
eight 64-bit words) we can add the newline-indicating words together first and
then add the individual bytes of the result using our trick.

This looks roughly like:

```Rust
count += (mask_zero_bytes(x0 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
        + mask_zero_bytes(x1 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
        + mask_zero_bytes(x2 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
        + mask_zero_bytes(x3 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
        + mask_zero_bytes(x4 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
        + mask_zero_bytes(x5 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
        + mask_zero_bytes(x6 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
        + mask_zero_bytes(x7 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
    ).wrapping_mul(LO) >> ((USIZE_BYTES - 1) * 8);
```

However, (and I was a bit surprised when finding out) we can get it a bit
faster still, because Rust appears not to shuffle additions optimally (despite
them being commutative). So if we just add some parenthesis, we can eke out
another ~5% speedup on top of the 15% we get (presumably because we got rid
of the intermediate bit shifting):

```Rust
count += ((mask_zero_bytes(x0 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
         + mask_zero_bytes(x1 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
         + mask_zero_bytes(x2 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
         + mask_zero_bytes(x3 ^ REP_NEWLINE))
        + (mask_zero_bytes(x4 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
         + mask_zero_bytes(x5 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
         + mask_zero_bytes(x6 ^ REP_NEWLINE)
         + mask_zero_bytes(x7 ^ REP_NEWLINE))
    ).wrapping_mul(LO) >> ((USIZE_BYTES - 1) * 8);
```

Interestingly, adding the same parenthesis to the POPCNT-using version had no
effect on performance on every machine I tested on.

The [benchmarks](https://github.com/llogiq/newlinebench) speak for themselves.
Note that I'm not using a single SIMD intrinsic here, relying instead on LLVM
autovectorization to do the right thing – which it apparently does in this
case.

(If you happen to run the benchmark on your machine, please file an issue at
that repo containing your findings – I'll be interested how this runs on
different hardware!)

I updated the PR to reflect the improvements. I also sent another
[PR](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep/pull/11) to Andrew's ripgrep repo,
so they can also benefit from the optimization.

----

PS.: Note that this operation is likely not responsible for much of the runtime
of either xi or ripgrep, but it was fun to pull off anyway. 😁

PPS.: [Bonus round!](/2016/09/27/count.html)

Do you have an optimization story to share? Or want to discuss other cool bit
hacks? Feel free to do so on both [r/rust](https://reddit.com/r/rust) and
[rust-users](https://users.rust-lang.org)!
