---
title: Rustic Bits
---

Some small things that make for rustic code:

`Result<(), ()>` == `bool`, but the compiler will warn if unused.
Similarly `Result<T, ()>` == `Option<T>`, with the same compiler 
warning. Use this type for results where the error case has no 
additional information. Also `Result<(), E>` for operations that can 
err but return no value otherwise.

----

Consider using an `enum MyEnum { SomeState, OtherState }` instead of
bool for distinguishing two states when used in function arguments to
clarify intent.

----

While other languages regard shadowing as something evil, it sometimes 
can be used to avoid mutation, e.g. `let x = x + 1;` creates a new 
implicit scope within which `x` means the increment of the `x` outside 
of that scope. However beware the scoping rules – the following code 
snippets are different:

```
let mut x = 0;                  let x = 0;
if something {                  if something {
    x = x + 1;                      let x = x + 1;
    foo(x);                         foo(x);
}                               }
bar(x);                         bar(x);
```

The program on the left calls `bar(1)` whereas the one on the right 
calls `bar(0)`.

----

Often you don't need a `String`. See if a `Cow<'a, str>` or even a 
`&str` suffices. Same goes for other owned types.

Resist the urge to `.clone()` to appease the borrow checker.

----

(Courtesy of [/u/mbrubeck](https://reddit.com/user/mbrubeck)) 

> You can use [rust-phf](https://github.com/sfackler/rust-phf) to build 
your hash table at compile time, with no heap allocations. Requires 
either a compiler plugin (nightly only) or code generation using a 
build.rs script.

Generally while it's not exactly easy in Rust, putting static immutable 
data in our programs is an often underused technique.

----

Name your methods consistently to their `self` argument:

|method    |self argument        |
|----------|---------------------|
|`from_`.. |(none)               |
|`new`     |(none)               |
|`as_`..   |`&self` / `&mut self`|
|`into_`.. |`self`               |
|`to_`..   |`&self`              |
|`is_`..   |`&self` (or none)    |
|`has_`..  |`&self` (or none)    |

Also implement existing traits where applicable.

----

Being careful to keep function arguments general will make your code more
flexible. One example of this is using slices (`&[T]`) instead of 
`Vec<T>`s. Another is making functions generic over input traits, e.g.
`fn<P: AsRef<Path>> with_path(p: P) { .. }`.

----

Make use of the ecosystem – use [crates.io](https://crates.io) to see 
if someone else has already written it. By the way, you can look for a crate's
[reverse dependencies](https://crates.io/api/v1/crates/clippy/reverse_dependencies)
to see how widely it is used.

----

Disagree about something? Am I missing things? What are the small 
techniques that make your code rustic? Discuss on 
[r/rust](https://reddit.com/r/rust) or
[rust-users](https://users.rust-lang.org).
