---
title: Famous
---

> I'd rather be a has-been than a might-have-been, by far; for a might 
> have-been has never been, but a has was once an are. — Milton Berle

Before I became software developer, in my youth, I had an early career as a 
musician. I sang and played guitar and keyboard in a rock band. We performed 
just about every weekend and enjoyed some modest success, including a few TV 
and Radio appearances (this was before MTV got big) and performing in front of 
crowds of thousands.

(As an aside, that was the background when I recently
[commented](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/4sdncw/why_were_starting_a_rust_consultancy/d597kpw)
on /r/rust: "You gotta start somewhere. I was a rock star before I became a 
developer.")

From that time I still have a cut out newspaper article with the headline "14 
year old rock star wants to get a PhD in CS" (I didn't completely follow 
through after realizing that a PhD would have bought me nothing until I stayed 
in academia, but that's another story).

The most important thing I learned from that time is that it's not about me. 
It's about the music – or the words you read on this blog. I try to stay humble 
(which is a daunting task for a person with an ego the size of mine 😜). Fame is 
a fickle mistress anyway.

So I noticed with some mild amusement when my pseudonym appeared in the 
[list](https://github.com/ctjhoa/rust-learning#famous-rustacean-bloggers) of 
"Famous Rustacean Bloggers" at rust-learning.

The Rust community is still young and small, so being "famous" there amounts to 
little. Also, despite me being a moderately capable writer (at least when I 
wrote a book my editor commended my style), the only thing I did was writing 
stuff for free on the intarwebs. Not exactly curing cancer, but a nice change 
from normal work, and it gave me a few very nice interactions I would have 
missed if not for it.

However, a recent development made me think again. A friendly Rustacean, 
[Vincent Esche](https://github.com/regexident) found that someone had 
plagiarized my [Java-Rust comparison](/2016/02/28/java-rust.html). My first 
thought was "Funny, I'm famous enough again to be plagiarized."

*Note*: I won't link to the incident here. If you really want, you can find the 
details on rust-users by searching for my article.

Applying my learnings, I don't care about being plagiarized. This is not about 
me, it's about the writing, the knowledge contained within. It's not like I'm 
making money with this. If a writer is so incapable of creating original 
stuff that they have to cheat and take it from my blog, they should perhaps 
think about pursuing a different career, but that's their (and possibly their 
employer's) problem, not mine.

Still it would have been nice to hear of this not by Vincent's awesome 
detective work (thanks, Vincent!), which unfortunately resulted in the takedown 
of the rip-off (yes, I consider it unfortunate, because it would have added a 
new vector for the knowledge to spread), but from the writer themselves. Not 
only that, they tried to remove the post and lied about it instead of taking 
responsibility for their actions. I think a "former senior journalist" should
know and act better, but perhaps at least this lesson has now been learned.

The incident also brought to my notice that I failed so far to license my blog. 
Shame on me. I hereby donate the content on this blog to the public domain 
(this only applies to the words contained, not the stylesheet or fonts, etc.). 
Veedrac gave me permission to include his writing on the [Rust 
Faster](/2015/10/03/fast.html) post in the donation.

But perhaps I can do one better: If you are an author seeking guidance or help 
writing about Rust or if you are a publisher wanting something exclusively 
written on Rust, I hereby invite you to contact me (I am 
[@llogiq](https://twitter.com/llogiq) on twitter and 
[/u/llogiq](https://reddit.com/user/llogiq) on reddit). As long as my schedule 
permits, I'll agree to write about Rust with or for you, as long as you pay it 
forward by donating a modest amount of money to some cause of our mutual 
choosing.
