---
title: Something Secret This Way Comes
---

On the Rust Lint Workshop, I started coding on a "secret" project (Actually I 
[hinted](https://llogiq.github.io/2016/02/05/hundred-sequel.html) at the 
possibility during our 100 clippy lints celebration). Now that I've built a 
prototype, it's time to spill the beans: I wrote a new lint. One might even say 
a new type of lint. One of the interesting things about this lint is that it 
*doesn't report anything*. Ever.

Instead, it collects *metadata* from the crates compiled with it. Notably: 
Which types contain what other types and which methods call which. So it 
basically compiles a network of types and functions that lets us find some 
interesting properties without obviously violating privacy. To faithfully 
describe those properties, I named this new lint 
'[nsa](https://github.com/llogiq/nsa)'.

Now what are those properties we want to find out? For example, with the 
collected metadata, we may check if a method can panic, because those that do 
have an `unwind` call somewhere in their call graph. This is obviously a very 
useful property to know e.g. for interrupt handlers or custom panic handlers.

Another example is the property of purity of a method – if a method is pure, we 
can replace multiple calls with the same parameters by one call. We simply 
define pure methods as methods that take only immutable borrows to types that 
are themselves not internally mutable (though we may want to carve out 
exceptions for `Rc<T>` and `Arc<T>`, considering their internal mutability is 
limited to the ref count).

We can also easily find out if a method is recursive, which would preclude 
compiling it to GPU code. Or if a type stores something on the heap. We may 
even be able to find out what methods can allocate something on the heap (and 
an `alloc` lint that could be `#[deny(_)]`d could be useful for embedded 
programming or high performance work.

However, we don't use the data yet, `nsa` only collects it. To make it useful 
(especially in other lints), we'll have to run it via a build script (calling 
`rustc -L/path/to/nsa.rlib -Z extra-plugins=nsa -Z no-trans` on the crate and 
all its dependencies). In the long run, I personally think the compiler should 
make this information available to lints (perhaps in some kind of serialized 
map format and an API to query it), but I don't have a say in that so here we 
are.

Anyway, this is just a prototype for now – there's a lot of work to do: Create
the build script, change the output (to database, add generics), add code to 
analyze the output so we can actually do something useful with it.

----

If you'd like to help, join me on [github](https://github.com/llogiq/nsa).
