---
title: Not Yet Implemented
---

When writing Rust code, I often stub out methods (or parts of them) that I 
intend to implement later with `unimplemented!()`. As I work primarily in Java, 
I recently thought about what keeps me from doing the same in Java. My IDE of 
choice is Eclipse (don't argue, the choice was actually made by my boss, though 
I am completely OK with it), which allows me to create new methods that contain 
the following (say, for a method returning a `String`):

```java
String myAwesomeMethod() {
    //TODO Auto-generated method stub
    return null;
}
```

The nice thing about it is that it compiles. The not-so-nice thing is that if I 
forget to implement the method, but use it somewhere, the returned `null` may 
or may not alert me to the fact that I just ran unimplemented code. The 
`NullPointerException` I will inevitably get may or may not be near the 
unimplemented method. At least I get a stack trace.

Unless I create a method that returns a primitive type, say `int`:

```java
int myEvenMoreAwesomeMethdo() {
    //TODO Auto-generated method stub
    return 0;
}
```

Again, this will happily compile, but unlike the `null` the returned zero may 
not even be distinguishable from a valid value (unless whatever code calls this 
function explicitly rules out zero, which is rare).

Much worse than `unimplemented!()`, don't you think? Luckily, there's a way to 
emulate this one. Click on `Window` → `Preferences`, expand `Java` → `Code 
Style` → `Code Templates`, in the upper area select `Code` → `Method body` and 
click the `Edit...` button.

Then change the pattern to the following:

```java
// ${todo} Auto-generated method stub
throw new Error("not yet implemented");
```

Now my unimplemented methods will automatically throw an Error that alerts me 
to the actual position I have to step in and code. Much better!
