---
title: Attention! Span
---

As I continue to learn different parts of Rust, I begin to gain more 
appreciation for the tricky questions that come up when you combine certain 
features. Often, things that seem trivially easy from one side turn out to be 
quite complex when looked at from a different angle. One of those things is the 
unassuming 
[Span](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/4960f2f9074d0d0f9de80b39f0b0ded6547e2ad8/src/libsyntax/codemap.rs#L126).

Those are used throughout the higher-level representations (that includes 
parsing, syntax desugaring, macro expansion, lowering to HIR, linting, type 
checking and error reporting) to locate the responsible piece of code, e.g. for 
errors, but also for suggestions.

Spans have a start position, an end position and an expansion ID, which can be 
used to look up an expansion information (ExpnInfo) object that records syntax 
desugarings and macro expansions, including a parent Span from which it was 
expanded. Or so the theory goes.

In practice this hinges on the question if macros (yes, that includes 
procedural macros) do the right thing when expanding. Unfortunately, this is 
not as easy as it sounds. For example, [serde](https://crates.io/crates/serde) 
at one place failed to set correct spans, causing 
[clippy](https://github.com/Manishearth/rust-clippy) to report warnings for 
things people didn't even write.

When we try to fetch code by span, we usually want to have the original code as 
written by the developer, though the code the compiler sees may be something 
completely different. So this state of affairs fails lint writers (and in turn 
people who want to use the output of such lints, e.g. IDEs). It also fails 
procedural macro writers, because there is zero documentation on how to deal 
with spans. A recent StackOverflow 
[question](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37582502/how-to-correctly-deal-with-spans-in-procedural-macros) 
of mine was unanswered until I posted my findings which I detail here.

As far as I can see, the MacroExpander (this is the type responsible for taking 
you `macro_rules!` definitions and applying them unto your code) does the right 
thing™, but it does so in a very subtle manner. It uses a `Marker` type that 
runs through the AST and sets the expansion IDs to the most recent expansion.

This is however not done for procedural macros, which are free to set their own 
spans everywhere. As I wrote above, there is little information on what the 
span for things should be. Let's take an example: A macro that changes `a + b` 
to `a.checked_add(b)`. The `a` and `b` should retain their original spans, as 
they haven't been changed. We still need a new span for the `checked_add` path 
expression and one for the method call.

I would assume the right thing would be for the method name path to be declared 
an expansion of the `+` binary operator (which neatly has a span) and the outer 
method call expression to be an expansion of the binary operation expression. 
The expansion info should note the attribute that asked for the expansion.

So if `cx` is the `ExtCtxt`, `expr` is the original expression and `op` is the 
`+` operator, the outer span should be `Span { expn_id: cx.backtrace(), 
..expr.span }` and the path span should be `Span { expn_id: cx.backtrace(), 
..op.span }`. If that's it, the only remaining questions are if `ExtCtxt` 
should have a method to handle those spans and if we want to call anyone 
writing procedural macros like this a *s*panhandler...

----

Did I get this right? If not, please correct me on 
[/r/rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/4qcu6c/blog_attention_span/) or 
[rust-users](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/blog-attention-span/6360/1). 
Otherwise, feel free to go there and discuss your learnings around spans.

