---
title: Writing a plugin to instrument code
---

*This assumes some nightly Rust 1.10.0 2016-04-28*

A few weeks ago, I stumbled over [flame](https://github.com/TyOverby/flame), a
library to produce beautiful SVG flame graphs by instrumenting the code (which
<s>IMHO is a much better approach than sampling profilers, because though it
likely introduces more overhead, it does not suffer from sampling bias</s>
Redditor [/u/kibwen](https://reddit.com/user/kibwen) thankfully reminded me 
that I wasn't doing this complex topic justice. Let's just say that sampling
and instrumentation suffer from different sets of problems, so it's good to
have both in our toolbox).

However, adding instrumentation calls to every method is a bit tedious, and I
thought it'd be useful to have a `#[flame]` annotation that would be used to
instrument all methods found within its scope. This requires a syntax extension
plugin, which is pretty foreign territory to me though I have some experience
with lints, which are another type of plugin after all.

Unfortunately, the documentation is pretty bare at the moment; the book shows
how to create roman numerals, but that's a bang-macro, while I wanted an
annotation. Digging into the source brought up 
`rustc_plugin::registry::Registry`, which lets us register our plugin.

So, let's take the plunge, shall we?

Like with macros, we need to activate the features `plugin_registrar` and
`rustc_private`, so this is nightly only. Since we want to modify the items in
place rather than adding new ones, we'll need a `MultiItemModifier`, which is a
trait that is already implemented for functions with the right signature. Cool.

So let's register an identity function first, here comes `flamer.rs`:

```rust
#![feature(plugin_registrar, rustc_private)]

extern crate rustc_plugin;
extern crate syntax;

use rustc_plugin::registry::Registry;
use syntax::ast::MetaItem;
use syntax::codemap::Span;
use syntax::ext::base::{Annotatable, ExtCtxt, MultiItemModifier, SyntaxExtension};
use syntax::parse::token;

pub fn expand(cx: &mut ExtCtxt, span: Span, mi: &MetaItem, a: Annotatable) -> 
        Annotatable {
    a // identity function for now
}

#[plugin_registrar]
pub fn plugin_registrar(reg: &mut Registry) {
    reg.register_syntax_extension(token::intern("flame"),
        SyntaxExtension::MultiModifier(
            Box::new(expand) as Box<MultiItemModifier + 'static>));
}
```

This at least compiles with `rustc --crate-type=dylib`. Let's try our new 
plugin using a `flamertest.rs`:

```
#[feature(plugin)]
#[plugin(flamer)]

#[flame]
fn main() {
    println!("It does nothing");
}
```

Compile with `rustc -L . flamertest.rs` and lo and behold: It does nothing.

That's admittedly somewhat underwhelming. But it's not too hard to let it do
something useful; as the `syntax::ast` classes have a lot of functionality we
can use. Of note are the following items:

* `syntax::ptr::P` is both a type and a method to create that type (as in 
`P(_)`)
* `syntax::codemap::DUMMY_SP` is a dummy span. the `dummy_spanned(_)` function
in the same module adds the dummy span to a node to create a `Spanned`
* `syntax::ast::DUMMY_NODE_ID` is the `NodeId` of choice when expanding ASTs
* `syntax::parse::token::intern(&str)` gets us a `Name` wherever we need one
* `InternedString::new_from_name(Name)` from the same module creates an
`InternedString` for whatever `Name` we have (e.g. for string literals)
* [manishearth.github.io/rust-internals-docs](https://manishearth.github.io/rust-internals-docs/syntax/)
has fairly up-to-date compiler docs, including libsyntax, which is handy when
dealing with AST types

Also note that the plugin only gets called when there are actual annotations,
so our plugin has to walk all items if we intend to inherit annotations to
inner items.

The full code is available on [github](https://github.com/llogiq/flamer).
