---
title: All In Moderation
---

I am – perhaps unbeknownst to some here – a moderator of both the [/r/java] and
[/r/rust] subreddits (despite not being part of the Rust moderation team. It's
complicated). This gives me a rather unique perspective on the state of both
communities.

The Java sub is obviously bigger and so we get to deal with a lot more spam and
trolls. Due to sheer volume, the Java mods take a hard line against spam, going
so far as to block links to certain estates by default, so you'll need to ask
us to unblock if you want to post them. On the other hand, bans are quite rare,
despite a steady trickle of trolls trying to derail useful discussion. Poor
disturbed souls. At least there are a few good ones who make for some morbid
entertainment.

At about a third the size, the Rust sub is a good deal smaller (but still one
of the medium sized programming language subreddits). The moderators only
rarely need to handle disruptions; most folks honor the [Code of Conduct]. On
the other hand, due to a name clash with a fairly popular game, the mods have
to deal with the occasional game-related submission, which has become quite the
game itself now (for a while we commented crossover-style, calling the type-
and borrow checker "end bosses" and confusing the hell out of people who
inadvertently posted to the wrong sub).

The Rust subreddit is perhaps an atypical sub because virtually no invective
gets flung around, and the mods usually handle any instances quickly and
effectively. The CoC drawing a clear line between desired and unwanted behavior
makes it *mostly* easy to decide which is which. This is a clear win here.

The few trolls that remain usually either spell Rust's doom (because nightly
vs. stable, Mozilla intervention or phases of the moon) or denounce the CoC
(because CoCs are teh evil, rah rah). Sadly those trolls tend on the low-qualiy
side. Quantity seems to correlate with quality here.

Unlike [/r/rust], [/r/java] disallows job postings. Every few weeks the mods
receive a complaint about this policy (usually from some head hunter or HR
person), but we stay the course. Similarly, pleas for help go to [/r/javahelp].
This allows people to filter for the news they want, and those who want to help
can use a [multisub](https://reddit.com/r/java+javahelp). In the Rust sub, both
job and help posts are cherished (though I try to channel help requests with
weekly sticky'd "Ask here!" threads).

## Tech toxicity

The tech world has a toxicity problem. As a mod, I see a lot of that. No
worries, I have that thick skin business down. Being called a Nazi does nothing
to me, and has lost a lot of novelty after a few hundred times. But I wouldn't
wish it on my friends. Or enemies (because if you really are my enemy, you've
earned my respect. Otherwise, if you think of yourself as my enemy, you're just
a nuisance. Go play somewhere else).

Steering clear of such behavior in the Rust community has led to surprised
reactions:

> the Rust community is so nice. How did you instill and protect that tone in
> the community?  — M. Verdone on
> [twitter](https://twitter.com/llogiq/status/816694887026491392)

But why should we be surprised? Most people outside the tech community would
instead scoff at the normalization of toxic behavior that our industry has
established. The general "consensus" seems to be that the toxic developers are
so good that we're better off allowing their antics for fear they may leave us
without their awesome contributions.

This is bullshit for three reasons:

First, most people aren't really inherently toxic (otherwise society as a whole
would look a lot different), they just tend to emulate people they look up to
(which unfortunately are the "ninjas", "rockstars" or "gurus"). This means they
are able to drop the antics when asked.

Second, most of those "ninjas", "rockstars", "gurus" or whatever have more
attitude then aptitude. Statistically speaking, even if most of the geniusses
were assholes, there are many more assholes than geniusses, so the chance that
an asshole is also a genius is negligible.

Third, and most important, we get to see the myriad small and large
contributions of those who are repelled by the 'tude, and that – not only by
sheer volume, but also by a very real quality – makes up at least tenfold for
the questionable contributions from the folks who profess being put off by the
existence of a code of conduct. The probability that we get the contributions
of a few geniusses this way that won't contribute to the "if you can't stand
the heat" projects is significant.

## How To Detox Your Project

So how can you apply the learnings of the Rust community to your project,
considering it's already overrun with toxic people? I wish I could offer you
some tried and tested advice. Alas, I have yet to see an example where this was
pulled off successfully.

So here's what I try to do: Be mindful of my communication around projects,
learn more about things like sexism, racism and ableism to be able to better
avoid them in the future. I reflect on what I say and do and try to improve.

Of course I make mistakes here and there – and I'm glad to have my fellow mods
point them out so I can correct them. There will always be trolls trying to get
me down, but those are but mosquitos trying to bite me on my path to personal
growth.

[/r/java]: https://reddit.com/r/java
[/r/javahelp]: https://reddit.com/javahelp
[/r/rust]: https://reddit.com/r/rust
[Code of Conduct]: https://rust-lang.org/conduct.html
