---
title: Traffic Jams
---

One word that often falls when discussing the Rust community is "nice". And
yes, this is the result of active effort of a number of official and inofficial
participants. Today I'm going to compare the Rust community with traffic.

There have been studies that show you need to direcly control only about 5% of
cars to eliminate traffic jams (sorry, I'm not going to google the paper,
trying to make a point here), and I believe the same applies to assholery in
programming communities: If just 5% agree on being nice, they may sway the
behavior of the community as a whole.

That is not to say everyone welcomes this kind of control. Imagine being in an
almost-jam, trying to weasle through traffic, cutting off people left and
right, only to find that a few cars before you, some cars *coast*, forming a
slow-ish barrier you (and perhaps the cars before you) cannot pass. They're
*slowing you down*! You'd honk in righteous anger! What you don't (and probably
don't want to) know is that those cars slow down to avoid a traffic jam, *by
keeping you from creating it*.

(As an aside, I find that driving in traffic tends to bring out the worst in
us. I'm unsure why that is, but I hear that people behave less well if they
feel being in their private space, and most people count their cars in that
category)

In a community the *coasters* being nice have a similar effect on those trying
to weasel their way through, shaming and trolling left and right. People being
nice offend those who don't want to be nice themselves, and those people honk
"SJW Police! Witch hunt!" in self-righteous fury. Lacking empathy, they think
others are only nice to appear better than them, to make them look bad. Why
else would someone waste the time and energy? Worse, with the backdrop of all
this friendlyness, their weasling attempts suddenly starkly contrast. So they
start to resent the "SJWs" on their high horses with their holier-than-you
'tude.

By defending their "freedom" to bring everyone else to a halt, they're telling
you that them being at their destination five seconds earlier is more valuable
than everyone around them not being stuck in traffic for another half an hour.
I sincerely doubt the idea that those metaphoric five seconds benefit the
community as a whole more than the multitude of half-hours wasted by being
stuck.

This is not to say that everyone who blurts "Freedom of Speech" is an asshole.
Some were just raised to believe that freedom is the biggest ideal and will
reflexively fight everything that appears to curtail it.  I personally believe
this is misguided. Freedom of Speech is not Guarantee of Audience. I have yet
to see any of those people speaking up when someone loud and obnoxious is
thrown out of a restaurant – yet by extension of the same logic this should
also count as a free speech violation, right?

Anyway, enough of the rambling. The key takeaway is that the argument that a
Code of Conduct keeps people from getting things done is completely bogus. On
the contrary, it keeps people from keeping other people from getting things
done. I'll leave you here with a verse:

Let's play a game & surprise  
folks'round you by being nice  
Who gets most smiles this way  
wins this game & the day  
Now go & apply this advice
