---
title: The First Crate Polishing Workshop
---

On Friday, the 24th of February, we held the first Crate Polishing Workshop in
Darmstadt, Germany at [Cowo21](http://cowo21.de) (German site), who thankfully
hosted the event free of charge. Thanks!

Let's first recap what makes up a crate polishing workshop:

* Select a crate. We drew by lot, but one can also pre-select a crate, which
allows for better preparation
* (If the crate maintainer is absent) fork the crate. All work will be done on
the fork
* set up teams of at least two people to work on CI, README, tests,examples,
docs. We could also [clippy]-clean and [rustfmt] the crate.
* hack, hack, hack...
* (afterwards) merge the PRs and send a combined PR to the maintainer if needed

What went well:

* We all had a good time. Some of us even learned something new
* Working in teams meant everyone had someone to talk to
* Splitting the tasks kept the whole thing manageable.
* Pairing experienced Rustaceans with newbies meant no one got stuck

What could have worked better:

* There was a lull in the beginning while we searched for the snip of paper
containing the WiFI password. Being there earlier and writing down the password
on more paper snips would have avoided that
* Drawing the crate by lot meant we had essentially no preparation. Selecting a
crate before would have allowed us to better prepare; though it is not clear if
this really posed a problem
* While merging stuff, there was a lot of waiting on CI. Doing a manual
N-way-merge would have alleviated this
* Three hours was quite short for such a workshop. Having more time would have
allowed us to dig deeper into the actual code; as it was, our coverage was
somewhat superficial

The final verdict:

This was fun, and I can recommend it as a learning experience for other
meetups. I've not yet reviewed the changes and prepared the final PR, so I'll
update this post once it is done; but I wanted to write this up here as long as
the memory is fresh.

[clippy]: https://github.com/Manishearth/rust-clippy
[rustfmt]: https://crates.io/crates/rustfmt
