---
title: Make Docs Into Code
---

At [clippy](https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/rust-clippy), we take
onboarding new developers seriously. Just like documentation. And we
always strive to improve our process (unless that keeps us from coding
on clippy, which we love, as we wouldn't be doing it otherwise in the
first place).

So since documentation has come up during recent RustConf, and Manish
has already given a [talk] about being welcoming to contributors, but
alas he forgot to mention the thing I'm writing about now, I want to
focus on a small thing that brings us a lot of goodness for a small
code investment, and that is our `update_wiki.py` script.

Just to get it out of the way, this script is written in Python,
because it's well suited for the task and readily available for most
of our developers. Now let's look into how it came to be.

When we started clippy, we had very little in the way of documentation
– at most a sentence describing what a lint should do and a bit about
installation and usage. Seeing much better documentation from similar
projects for other languages, we first set up a project wiki which I
filled with information about the lints following a template I created
that had roughly the following points:

* What the lint searches for
* Why this is bad
* Known problems
* Example
* Default lint level

*Lesson learned: Templates are awesome for documenting similar things.*

Unfortunately, this was quite time-consuming. And it didn't show up on
my github timeline. Also the docs went out of date all the time,
whenever a new lint was added or a bug was fixed. This was
unsustainable.

So we came to the conclusion that we need to update the docs with the
code. The only way to do this is to *make* the docs code. We needed to
incorporate our docs into the code and ask contributors to keep it up
to date.

Georg Brandl started this with a script that ran through our lint
definitions (which use a format prescribed by rustc, and was easy to
coopt here) and updated our `README.md` (It also updates the version
information in the installation instructions and the `libs.rs` lint
list.

*Lesson learned: Automate away the tedium to remove boring busywork and
ensure unrelenting accuracy.*

Next, I used parts of his script to write a `update_wiki.py` script
that would look for doc comments on the lint definitions (that were not
interesting to rustdoc anyway) and create the wiki documentation we
had. It also warned on lints that had no documentation on the wiki. I
copied all our wiki docs into the code to start the transition.

This had two profound effects:

First, our docs were now updated with the code. Timeliness improved
drastically, and has mostly stabilized. This was great for our users,
because they no longer had to cope with stale docs (mostly).

Second, and in my opinion more important, doc contributions became code
contributions. This means that doc changes use the same PR process as
all other contributions, get the same review, mentoring and recognition
as everything else. Also doc changes are often bundled with other code
changes, which makes them even easier to review.

We have since moved away from the wiki and use a custom page made by
Pascal Hertleif that allows you to browse the docs for all clippy
versions.

*Lesson learned: Rustdoc already makes docs code. Whenever you have
(or need) docs that don't fit its niche, seek out other ways to make
the docs part of your code.*

[talk]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AHprJNUCgQ0
