---
title: Why not to use Rust
---

In the last months, I've seen a lot of evangelism around Rust, much of it
apparently from the fringes of our community. Some is good and well and
reflects the stance I've seen from the official teams. On the other hand, there
are some instances of really bad proselytizing. Liz Baillie's
[RustFest 2017 Talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iF-FgJvDl6w) has a really
funny section on it (around 7:33, but do yourself a favor and watch the whole
thing if you haven't already).

To improve communications with those who have yet to see the Rust light, here's
a list of points that can be valid reasons for folks to hold back on learning
it. If you get any of the points of this list, the folks mentioning them are
aware of their situation and may be better of without using Rust for now.

* Many teams or even companies dictate the use of programming language. Trying
to push a language that has a short-ish (but wildly successful) track record
can be a no-starter
* Rust isn't available on all target operating systems or hardware platforms
* Even where it is available, the installation servers may not be trusted by
their organization
* They or their colleagues may not be inclined to learn Rust. Forcing it on
them will sour them to the already steep learning curve
* Rust has progressed far, but there is still a lot to do. For some things, C
or Fortran may still be faster, whereas other languages may have more library
or IDE support
* The project, team or company may already have substantial investment in
another language (both in code and know-how, as redditor mockery0 aptly reminds
me), so switching to Rust may obsolete some of this

That last point explains much of the pushback we see from C++ programmers. C++
is a huge strange beast and learning it is a heck of an investment. Asking
those who've done it to deprecate their knowledge (especially if they earn
their livelyhood armed with that knowledge) isn't going to win friends (apart
from that, it appears that learning Rust requires to some extent un-learning
C++. We need better onramps for C++ programmers).

Remember, Rust is a *currently* very good compromise between performance,
productivity and safety. But it's there for a goal and that is not to take over
the world: The goal is to raise the safety level of all software – written in
Rust or not. The end game for Rust is to be replaced – hopefully – with
something even better. I sure hope I live to see that thing.
