---
title: Rust Sucks If I Fail To Write X
---

A recurring theme of critique against the [Rust](https://rust-lang.org)
language is "You cannot write basic data structures without resorting to
`unsafe`".

First, let me tell you that this is mostly true. While you can hack together a
"list" that will be backed by a `Vec` of nodes with indices to the next /
previous item, this approach is quite wasteful – and gains little compared to
using the `Vec` directly.

As an aside, remember that the only difference to C/c++ is that if you write a
"basic linked list" in them, *all* of your code will be unsafe. And those
seemingly simple structures are actually surprisingly tricky to get right. Try
to write a doubly linked list without getting a segfault at least once. I'll
wait. Even if you manage to do it safely, it will usually still be inferior in
terms of performance (unless you do a lot of insertion/removal at various
places).

Rustaceans usually opt for continuous data layout (known in C/C++ lingua as
array-of-struct or struct-of-array depending on priorities), which is more
cache-friendly than reference-heavy data structures anyway. For the remaining
scenarios, there are crates for [finite state transducers], [specialized
hashmaps] and [graphs] – each a simple `cargo add` away (ok, once you've done
`cargo install cargo-edit`). Rust's facilities for code reuse makes using them
a no-brainer.

Even so, there *is* more decorum around using those data structures, especially
when borrowing into them (which is one of the selling points of Rust after
all), but on the other hand, this steers programmers in the direction of
keeping layout easy, which makes for maintainable and often surprisingly fast
programs. Indeed anectotical evidence shows that "unoptimized" (read: The first
version someone got to work) programs perform within an order of magnitude to
optimized C code, while being – at least to the trained eye – vastly easier to
read.

In addition, Rust is balanced so that it's possible to reason locally (within a
function) about control- and data flow. This gives Rust code a certain
*obviousness* that leaves little room for errors. Note however that some
Rustaceans use the abstractive power of Rust to write fairly "lofty" code that
over-generalizes and as a result isn't as easy to read or reason about.
Rustaceans being bullish on documentation at least partially remedies this
problem.

So, to summarize my rambling above:

1. Should you write data structures in Rust? If you just want to *use* them,
get one of those available in `std` or on [crates.io]. Otherwise, knock
yourself out; if you don't, the borrow checker likely will.

2. Is this a problem with Rust? Not at all. You can do a *lot* of stuff just
using the supplied types. And you can always reach for `unsafe` if you really
need.

[unified linked list]: https://kernelnewbies.org/FAQ/LinkedLists
[finite state transducers]: https://crates.io/crates/fst
[specialized hashmaps]: https://crates.io/crates/ordermap
[graphs]: https://crates.io/crates/petgraph
[crates.io]: https://crates.io
