---
title: A Shifty Riddle
---

When I finally implemented [opportunistic mutations] in [mutagen], everything seemed fine until my
co-maintainer gnieto found a problem. Code failed to compile with the mutagen plugin, something
that should never happen as long as the code in question compiles without the plugin. We not only
broke the code – we broke the build.

I was stumped. We did nothing obviously wrong (which, alas, is not the same as obviously doing
nothing wrong), and the error was less than helpful.

At least I managed to reduce his failing example to the following: `::std::ops::Shl::shl(1u32, 2) *
3`, which fails with a type error because it tries to multiply `u32` and `i32`. This code is just
an expansion of `(1u32 << 2) * 3` which compiles flawlessly. At this point I had at least ruled out
specialization and our op traits as possible root of our troubles.

Perhaps changing our opportunistic mutation implementation to implement the original traits for
some newtype that wraps the left-hand-side expression and the mutation count could solve it?

```rust
use std::ops::*;

struct MutOp<T>(T);

impl<T, Rhs> Shl<Rhs> for MutOp<T> where T: Shl<Rhs> {
    type Output = <T as Shl<Rhs>>::Output;
    fn shl(self, r: Rhs) -> Self::Output {
        self.0 << r
    }
}

fn main() { (MutOp(1u32) << 2) * 3; }
```

No, that fails with the same error. Worst of all, I did not know the actual cause. In my
frustration, I [asked StackOverflow]. I got some positive votes, but no answer. Time to dig in the
Rust source code:

`librustc_typeck/check/op.rs` has some special [handling] for binary operations including `&&` and
`||` (which require their arguments to be `bool`s and always return `bool`, but also `<<` and `>>`.
The comments note that there are many implementations for various right-hand-side types. For
integer types, the special case kicks in, and the result type is set to the type of the left-hand
expression.

This handling obviously doesn't apply to method calls, so there we have the difference between
`1u32 << 2` and `1u32.shl(2)`. It also only appears to apply to integer types, which rules out our
wrapper. So how do we fix this?

I found the solution while eating lunch. The reason our compilation fails is that typeck cannot
look through the `impl`s to see that the result type of the shift equals the left-hand-side
argument's type. Therefore, when looking for the type of the right-hand-side of the multiplication,
it applies the `i32` default for integers without specific type information. Later when it has
found the `Shl` impl, it sets the type of the left-hand-side argument to `u32`, which leads to the
error. So we need to fix the type of the shift without knowing it or needlessly executing it.

One way to unify the types of two expressions in code is to use an `if`:

```rust
(if false { 1u32 << 2 } else { ::mutagen::ShlShr::shl(1u32, 2, 42) }) * 3
```

This works, and perhaps surprisingly doesn't trigger the `dead-code` lint, even when not issued by
a macro (I'm going to add a macro check should this ever change). Note that we only need a copy of
the original expression and of the operands to make this work, so we neither need to know the types
nor execute the original expression.

When I implemented this, I also ran against a problem where `quote_expr!` would mis-insert `$`
sub-expressions if they were used more than once. I fixed this by creating local bindings. Now
shifts are mutated as they should be and we can go on mutating other stuff.

Moral of the story: Shifts happen.

[opportunistic mutations]: https://llogiq.github.io/2018/03/03/opportune.html
[mutagen]: https://github.com/llogiq/mutagen
[asked StackOverflow]: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/49730693/why-is-stdopsshlshl-not-equal-to
[handling]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/a1c21ed7e21642b85947ba5d030bbaeffbe377de/src/librustc_typeck/check/op.rs#L103-L110
