---
title: Trust
---

I recently found the time to reflect on the factors that allows us to *grow* –
both as software developers and as persons. The one factor I want to
concentrate today is trust. First, why is trust important for growth? It is
because growth only happens when you are out of your comfort zone, doing stuff
that you've never done before. In such a situation, you will be dealing with
uncertainty. Uncertainty without trust begets fear, and fear paralyzes.

In the sixties, Stanford Prof. W. Mischel created a series of experiments, the
most famous of which is known as the [Stanford Marshmallow experiment]. The
premise of the experiment is simple: Give a kid the choice of having one
marshmallow now or two later (the actual test was a bit more complex, but this
is the gist).

The researchers found that trust was the main differentiator for the outcome of
the test. Which is not surprising: If you suspect that the alternative outcome
of the experiment would be zero marshmallows, you'd take the one now, too.

Fast forward – you are now an adult. Perhaps you work for a company, or perhaps
you have your own? In any event, your livelyhood depends a lot on whether you
can trust your environment – bosses, coworkers, clients, etc. Not only because
of the ability to delay gratification. A different angle is that if you cannot
depend on your environment, you'll live in a constant state of worry, and
thusly preoccupied can hardly do your best work. You won't feel safe enough to
move out of your comfort zone. You'll stagnate.

Which is why "Managers" who belittle their subordinates are all the more
infuriating. By creating uncertainty, they sabotage their subordinates, then
make them personally responsible in case of failure.

The same goes for communities (say, of a programming language or operating
system): All the gatekeeping, the "can't stand the heat, get out of the
kitchen" posturing, the toxicity will generate an environment of distrust, in
which you "need a thick skin" to get anything done. The anti-SJW like to
overlook this problem when decrying code-of-conducts. No wonder the Rust
community is so productive.

Let's make a simple thought experiment: Assume for the sake of the argument
that skin thickness is a spectrum. Some people have very thick skin, others
very thin, and most something in between. For each community (or company or
other organization), the requirement of thick-skinnedness will also vary
between princess bride and military-grade.

Let's also be *very* generous to the anti-SJWs and assume that
thick-skinnedness positively correlates with programming acumen, say, with a
correlation coefficient of C=0.7 that I just pulled out of somewhere you won't
want to know. The actual correlation is very likely much lower, but bear with
me here.

As I argued above, the ability to be productive is impeded with distrust. This
will of course affect thick-skinned personalities less than thin-skinned (but
the effect will still be measurable). So let's work out a few examples:

For a very toxic project, we will have but a few thick-skinned contributors,
who per our correlation assumption above will score good on programming acumen,
but will still be somewhat impeded by distrusting their environment, doubly so
for tasks out of their comfort zone. They will thus fail to unlock their full
potential, so some may leave for more friendly projects. Others, never having
experienced the benefits of a safe environment, will stay.

On the other hand, a friendly Code of Conduct-bearing project will attract a
broader spectrum of people. There will still be thick- and thin-skinned folks
(remember that thick skin doesn't preclude seeking out friendliness), and as
per our correlation assumption a mixture of great and mediocre programmers. The
welcoming environment begets trust, so everyone will work at their peak
productivity, often outside their comfort zone. This is where growth lies, so
not only will they *be* more productive, they will *become* more productive.

Does this effect cancel out the relative mediocrity of the friendly project's
contributors? I argue that it does. First, the project is as likely as the
toxic project above to attract top-notch contributors, so their contribution is
not lost. Even better, their contribution is amplified by being able to trust
the environment, and they can help get less experienced contributors get up to
speed, thus avoiding any negative effects that less-than-excellent
contributions might have.

----

So if you are a developer, seek out companies and projects you can trust (the
former are unfortunately harder to find than the latter). Whenever you join a
project, try your best to earn and keep your co-contributors' trust. Grow and
help others grow.

If you are a manager, your first and foremost task is to create a safe
environment for your subordinates to trust. *Never* betray their trust, no
matter the payoff or risk. I once almost lost a job because my direct
supervisor wanted someone fired (how stupid is that?) because of some mistake
and I wouldn't let him at my subordinates. I still think I made the right call.
(That supervisor found himself overruled when trying to fire me, and later
found that no one would want to work with him).

If you are a project maintainer, make sure your project is open as in welcoming
(borrowing a phrase from Manish Goregaokar's great [RustFest Kyiv keynote]). Be
proactive, tag your issues, mentor, etc. I think I've done a rather mediocre
job of this with [mutagen] (I'm new to this, too), but I already have two
competent co-maintainers and various contributors; the project is moving faster
than I'd have imagined even when I'm not working on it.

[Stanford Marshmallow experiment]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanford_marshmallow_experiment
[RustFest Kyiv keynote]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AHprJNUCgQ0
[mutagen]: https://github.com/llogiq/mutagen
