---
title: More Space For Cargo
---

I love [Rust] and so much enjoy writing it that I will often do so voluntarily.

However, some things make it harder for me than needed to write Rust. See, I
have precious little time, and this time is also often interrupted. During this
time, I may or may not be connected to the internet, and my Chromebook's main
persistent storage is 32GB, so I usually have less than 5GB of free space.

Needless to say, this can present problems. Cargo, while otherwise very good,
will often not be very thrifty with hard drive space. The `target/` directory
of a project will contain all compiled dependencies and various other files
taking up space. I am unsure why this is necessary – I often have many projects
which have similar dependencies (for example serde), so wouldn't it suffice to
store them in one place, perhaps distinguished by selected features, target
triple etc. so the compiled libs can be reused without recompiling?

Apart from that, cargo keeps a per-user directory where it stores the registry
and downloaded sources for each version of each crate ever used. So in practice
this sources fill up to a few GB of my precious hard drive space.

I haven't found a reliable procedure to clean up outdated crate sources, so I
just delete that directory every now and then. Except that means I'll have to
re-download all of them whenever I'll try to recompile a crate that uses them,
over a possibly spotty internet connection.

So what to do?

I imagine two utilities. One would be applicable to any `.cargo` source
directory, walk all sources and remove all but the newest and their
recursive dependencies. The other would get a number of projects directories
and search their `Cargo.toml`s for dependencies, removing every source download
that isn't used in those projects afterwards.

Actually, those utilities are very similar – the sole difference is the first
step, where the former scans just the registry source directory and keeping
a map of crate name to latest version, discarding older versions on the way,
to recreate a set of directories that we'll use as a base. The latter must walk
all subdirectories and seek out `Cargo.toml`s.

There are a few bumps on that road. The first is finding the cargo source
directory on all platforms reliably. For now, I'll use `$HOME/.cargo`. Then
walking the directory, selecting the newest versions and the maximum by semver.
Luckily the semver crate has got this one covered. Finally tracking the
dependencies and walking the dir again, removing all unmarked directories and
dealing with possible errors on each step.

Also we may want to report outdated dependencies for crates, so we can send
update PRs to further reduce disk space usage by dependencies.

[Rust]: https://rust-lang.org
