---
title: proc_macro_attribute Revisited
---

Recently, the procedural macro interface was somewhat stabilized. OK, there's
still the unstable `proc_macro_hygiene` feature you have to activate, but at
least the `registrar` and `rustc_private` are no longer needed.

So I set out to rewrite flamer, my most simple procedural macro crate, to the
new interface, using [syn] and [quote]. Given that this new interface is deemed
to stabilize in the next months, it's as good a time as ever to take the
plunge.

So, first, the `Cargo.toml`. We no longer need `type = plugin`. Instead, our
`[lib]` gets a `proc_macro = true` setting. We also need some dependencies
(current as of the time of writing, please check the versions if you intend to
copy):

```toml
syn = { version = "0.15.18", features = ["full", "fold", "parsing"] }
quote = "0.6.9"
```

Note the used syn features. `full` means syn comes with the complete
functionality to parse and fold any Rust AST type, whereas by default, only
types needed for `derive`s are included (which greatly reduces compile times).
The `fold` feature activates the `Fold` trait and corresponding functions
giving us a nice interface to change code on the fly. The `parsing` feature
allows parsing `TokenStream`s into syn's types.

Compared to my [initial version], we no longer need to deal with registering
anything. We just annotate a plain function with an attribute and voilà:

```rust
#[proc_macro_attribute]
fn flame(attrs: TokenStream, code: TokenStream) -> TokenStream {
    ..
}
```

The `attrs` stream denotes the given attributes (one of which is our `flame`
attribute). The function name is the name of the attribute that activates the
macro.

syn has a `parse_macro_input!` macro that we can use to parse `TokenStream`s
into anything that has a `Parse` implementation. It's not too hard to create
one ourselves, and indeed this is one thing I do for flamer to allow setting
an initial name. In this case however, we want to parse the code into an `Item`
so we can `fold` it:

```rust
let input = parse_macro_input!(code as Item);
let mut flamer = parse_macro_input!(attrs as Flamer);
let item = fold::fold_item(&mut flamer, input);
TokenStream::from(quote!(#item))
```

The `Fold` trait is pretty straightforward, with one method per type that can
be folded and that are by default implemented by folding all the contents. In
our case, we want to be able to special-case arbitrary items to ensure that
double-`#[flame]`s don't get counted twice and `#[noflame]`d items don't get
flamed at all. We also record the names of all items visited to generate
useful names for our flame guards later.

We also want to insert a `let _flame_guard = ::flame::start_guard(#name)`
statement (where `name` is the string literal generated by joining the
recorded item names). at the starting position of the outermost block of each
`#[flame]`d function or method. The `parse_quote!(..)` macro makes generating
such a statement straightforward and as we already get the whole object, we
can mutate it by `block.stmts.insert(0, ..)`. This works without any surprise.
Great!

I won't list any code here, but you can simply look into the [flamer] github
repository, the code is quite simple.

Next, I wanted to rewrite [overflower]. This is naturally a bit more complex,
as we need to change `ExprUnary` and `ExprBinary`s into `ExprCall`s *and* obey
attributes on various items and expressions. One niggle here is that `syn`
keeps the attributes in the inner types, so `Expr` is a big enum where each
variant has its own content type, e.g. `ExprBinary`. This means I have to
match over all variants that could contain relevant subexpressions to take
care of the attributes. An accessor on `Expr` would have been very helpful
here.

When I finally thought that I had it figured out, I got an unhelpful error
during macro expanson. `cargo expand` proved unhelpful, so I commented out
various parts of the code to see whether they'd make any difference. This at
least reduced the possible errors to the generation of the trait method
calls. The problem is that a `&str` cannot be quoted as an `Ident`.

I finally arrived at the solution: `syn::parse_str::<Ident>(..).unwrap()`. This
leaves me with one final problem: I cannot get macros expanded. This used to be
a problem with the old interface, too, but there were a number of workarounds.

In fact, for both overflower and mutagen, I don't even need expanded macros, if
I can get the macro matchers for their arguments. For example, if I have the
following macro call: `id!(a + b)`, I cannot know if `a + b` is an `Expr` or if
`a` and `b` are paths and the `+` is matched by the macro. So I risk changing
the macro's meaning if I blindly try to fold expressions within their argument
`TokenStream`s, and in the worst case failing the build.

It'll be very interesting to see the solutions to that problem. In the meantime
anyone working on this, chat me up on [twitter], [reddit] or the next
[RustFest]!

[syn]: https://docs.rs/syn
[quote]: https://docs.rs/quote
[initial version]: https://llogiq.github.io/2016/05/17/flamer.html
[flamer]: https://github.com/llogiq/flamer/blob/92b3427857b463e4f94c71c180c145034bfe9574/src/lib.rs
[overflower]: https://github.com/llogiq/overflower
[twitter]: https://mobile.twitter.com/llogiq
[reddit]: https://www.reddit.com/r/rust
[RustFest]: https://rome.rustfest.eu
