---
title: Mutagen – More opportunities
---

Recently I gave a talk at our [Rust Meetup] about [mutagen], and I also showed
how our [opportunistic mutations] work (I however left out that gnarly thing
about [shifts], but in my defense I was short on time). That got me thinking
whether we always do the right thing elsewhere.

The problem with running as a procedural macro is we only get to see the marked
subsection of the code without any access to the surrounding context. This is
somewhat problematic because paths (e.g. `foo`, `Ok` or `Option::None::<u32>`)
are just stated without resolving them, and Rust code can *shadow* just about
everything (e.g. by `use`ing a different type, or by a `let` binding).

## Some source of confusion

So what if someone creates their own enum with a `Some` variant and `use`s it?
Even if we find a `Some`, we cannot reliably conclude that the type must be
[`std::option::Option`]. Take the following examples:

```rust
if let Some(x) = wtf_per_mins() { .. }

while let Ok(_) = do_io() { .. }
```

We cannot be sure that `wtf_per_mins()` really returns an `Option<_>`, so how
can we mutate this? By wrapping it in an opportunistic mutation function we
might call `mutagen::some`. The method may be implemented like this:

```rust
#![feature(specialization)]

trait Somer<T> {
    fn some(self, mutation_count: usize) -> Self;
}

impl<T> Somer for T {
    default fn some(self, _count) -> Self { self }
}

impl<T> Somer for Option<T> {
    fn some(self, mutation_count: usize) -> Self {
        report_coverage(..);
        if now(mutation_count) { None } else { self }
    }
}

pub fn some<T>(t: T, mutation_count: usize) -> T {
    Somer::some(t)
}
```

The analogiq solution for `Ok(_)` and `Err(_)` turns out not to be quite so
simple, because we need to differentiate the output type between `Result<_, _>`
and others, but don't have a valid value of the opposite variant, so if we want
to mutate `Ok(a)` to `Err(_)` we have nothing to put into the `Err(_)`, despite
the value being thrown away by the `if let`. In other cases, I would use an
associated `Output` type, but the type must simultaneously be `Result<T, ()>`
or `Result<(), E>`, respectively *and* `Self` (where `Self` is the type of the
mutated expression). Associated types cannot be specialized, because it was
found this could be used to introduce unsoundness.

A solution to this conundrum may present itself in the future, either through
one of my readers who is far more clever than me, or perhaps in the shower or
over lunch. For today, let's leave it at that.

## Default

Similarly to optional values, we currently have a whitelist of types that must
implement `Default`, but the matching is by necessity heuristic, as we don't
get the full path. If someone e.g. creates their own `Option` type that fails
to implement `Default`, we'll get an error. However, this can be fixed.

Similarly to our `MayClone` trait, we can add a `MayDefault` trait. However,
there is one crucial difference: With `MayClone` we can get an actual `self`
parameter because we have a value. But we don't have the return value of the
function. How then can we chose the right type?

Luckily I already know the solution from back in 2015 when I did some really
evil [Type-Level Shenanigans]: [`PhantomData`] to the rescue! We just need to
create our own type that takes a `PhantomData` of the function return type and
implement our `MayDefault` trait for that type:

```rust
#![feature(specialization)]

use std::marker::PhantomData;

#[derive(Copy, Clone)]
pub struct MayDefaulter<X>(PhantomData<X>);

impl<X> MayDefaulter<X> {
    pub fn new() -> Self { MayDefaulter(PhantomData) }
}

pub trait MayDefault<X> {
    fn is_default(self) -> bool;
    fn get_default(self) -> X;
}

impl<X> MayDefault<X> for MayDefaulter<X> {
    default fn is_default(self) -> bool { false }
    default fn get_default(self) -> X { unimplemented!() }
}

impl<X: Default> MayDefault<X> for MayDefaulter<X> {
    fn is_default(self) -> bool { true }
    fn get_default(self) -> X { Default::default() }
}
```

Now we can use the following incantation to opportunistically return default:
`let m = MayDefaulter::new(); if m.is_default() { return m.get_default() }`
(The actual usage within our plugin will likely use fully qualified syntax as
in `MayDefault::is_default(m)` because that lets us specify the full path).

Voilà – no more default type whitelist wrangling.

**Update**: Huon Wilson [came up] with a more elegant formulation of the
default specialization:

```rust
pub trait MayDefault: Sized {
    fn get_default() -> Option<Self>;
}

impl<X> MayDefault for X {
    default fn get_default() -> Option<X> { None }
}

impl<X: Default> MayDefault for X {
    fn get_default() -> Option<X> { Some(Default::default()) }
}
```

Thanks!

[Rust Meetup]: https://www.meetup.com/Rust-Rhein-Main
[mutagen]: https://github.com/llogiq/mutagen
[opportunistic mutations]: https://llogiq.github.io/2018/03/03/opportune.html
[shifts]: https://llogiq.github.io/2018/04/11/shift.html
[`std::option::Option`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/option/enum.Option.html
[Type-Level Shenanigans]: https://llogiq.github.io/2015/12/12/types.html
[`PhantomData`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/struct.PhantomData.html
