---
title: Thanks For Asking!
---

One part of my personal dedication to Rust is writing weekly "Ask easy questions here" threads on
the [rust subreddit]. One thing that recently occurred to me is that most of the questions asked
may hint at a deficiency in documentation and teaching material. We are, as far as I know, not
using this resource for now.

So here's a broad categorization of the topics of the last three weeks' worth of questions:

* questions about the new edition, or other new / unstable features. Those are to be expected and
usually come from early adopters which accept missing documentation
* people asking for code review. Interestingly I haven't seen request for mentors yet
* misleading or hard to interpret error messages – those are usually followed up with a rust issue.
Though there is still work to be done, all is well in that regard
* generics, where clauses, associated types (especially the `<Foo as Bar>::Baz` syntax), coherence
and trait object safety
* lifetime issues, we still haven't found an easy way to teach them, so people are going through
some pain here. On the other hands, most such questions get quite great answers, which we should
probably mine for teaching approaches
* `macro_rules!` definition and usage – though DanielKeep's [little book of rust macros] is a great
resource, either it is insufficiently advertised, or we need to come up with other documentation
* error handling: `?` operator, Error type translation, custom error types, the [failure] crate
* crate organization, subcrates and workspaces. I must admit that I don't yet have a handle on how
this stuff works, despite using it in three of my projects
* the module system ("can `main.rs` use `path/to/lib.rs`, and if yes, how?"), how and why to
`use somecrate::prelude::*` – this stuff is in flux and will probably be improved soon
* iterator usage: Perhaps the `Iterator` documentation could use more examples
* data strucure pragmatics and usage
* allocation, `Box`, the distinction between owned and borrowed values
* drop order, `drop()` and the significance of the `Drop` trait
* numeric casts and the non-availability of numeric inter-type operations
* blanket implementations of traits for arrays and tuples (those should probably have docstrings
once [#51885] is merged)
* cross-compiling to non-standard targets (embedded, WASM or CUDA)

Hopefully someone interested in improving Rust's learnability finds this useful.

[rust subreddit]: https://reddit.com/r/rust
[little book of rust macros]: https://danielkeep.github.io/tlborm/book
[failure]: https://docs.rs/failure
[#51885]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/51885
