---
title: Measuring SmallVec Footprint with Smallvectune
---

[Rust] is all about paying only for what you use, and gives us plenty tools to
eliminate unneeded allocation. One of the tools that is used in a lot of crates
([crates.io] shows 98 dependent crates) is `SmallVec`. It is also used in the
Rust compiler. I recently got around to speed up the operation of getting a
`SmallVec` from a slice of copyable data. In short, they're awesome.

`SmallVec`s use a trick to put data inline if it fits, only spilling into an
internal `Vec` when their inner capacity is exceeded. For maximal flexibility,
they get a type parameter that is an array of 1..36, 64, 128, 256, .. up to
2<sup>20</sup> of the component type. But how to decide on the right array
size, especially if you use a lot of different `SmallVec`s?

First, the size in memory of a `SmallVec<[Item; N]>` is
`mem::sizeof<usize>() + max(2 * mem::sizeof<usize>(), mem::sizeof<Item> * N)`
(there is also four bytes for a discriminant unless you activate the `union`
feature which gets rid of it). Also the spilled variant will incur an
allocation of `mem::sizeof<Item>() * capacity`.

Note that size in memory is not the only thing to optimize for – having a
slightly larger `SmallVec` on stack in exchange for less allocs might be a good
thing – but let's first look at memory, as that's usually an easy win, and we
cannot in general distinguish `SmallVec`s on stack from those on the heap.

Even so, in a larger application, it's not trivial to even keep track of the
actual capacity distribution of all `SmallVec`s, and I think having that data
would be valuable. So I wrote a small wrapper crate around `smallvec` to keep
track of all capacity changes, logging them to a file so we can summarize them
later.

This is the [`smallvectune`] crate.

## Usage

Let's take your typical smallvec-using crate. The `Cargo.toml` has a

```toml
[dependencies]
# comment this out
# smallvec = "0.6.5"

# use this instead
smallvectune = "0.0.1"
```
In your `lib.rs` (if it's a library crate), change

```rust
// don't use directly
// extern crate smallvec;

// use this instead
extern crate smallvectune as smallvec;
```

Now set the environment variable `SMALLVECTUNE_OUT` to somewhere writeable and
run the workload you want to analyze. This will get you a CSV file with

```
item size in bytes;internal array size;+ or -;capacity
```

The `+` entries show that a `SmallVec` was created or resized to the new
capacity, the `-` entries show a `SmallVec` that was deallocated or resized
from the old capacity. This should be enough to keep a running count of the
smallvecs at any point in time, and also estimate their memory footprint. We
can differentiate use sites by using different internal array sizes.

I intend to use this with the Rust compiler. Stay tuned. Also if you have one
of the 98 SmallVec-dependent crates, try it out and tell me what you think!

PS.: Please someone help me with summarizing this data.

[Rust]: https://www.rust-lang.org
[crates.io]: https://crates.io
[`smallvectune`]: https://github.com/llogiq/smallvectune
