---
title: Some Slight Improvements
---

Hi there! I'm back! Today I want to talk about two [Rust] PRs I recently wrote.
The PRs in question are [#52942] and [#52997]. Both are relatively small
changes to Rust's internally used data structures that improve performance and
readability. Both have some basic benchmarks (the first one already had them
and I wrote them for the second one), although it's rather hard to gauge
whether they really impacted compile times (as [perf.rust-lang.org] puts all
changes of the specific day together). But that's not the point I want to make
right now.

The Rust compiler, impressive though it is, has a *lot* of code, much of it
not written in the best style, sometimes convoluted because of old restriction
that have long since been lifted. Changing this is actually quite easy. Follow
me while I trace my workflow for both PRs:

# SmallVec

Reading through ljedrz' [#52859] I found the code unidiomatic, and the author's
explanation that they ran into a borrow checker problem raised the suspicion I
could improve matters further.

(Aside: I'm usually on top of the PR queue because I put together a list of
weekly merged PRs for [This Week in Rust])

I waited for the PR to be merged, as the author thankfully had included some
benchmarks I wanted to reuse. Then I looked into what actually happened:
`SmallVec` has two modes: Array and Heap. In the first, data is stored inline,
otherwise it will use a `Vec`. Now the speedup of this PR resulted in the fact
that once the Heap state had been arrived at, the Vec would simply be extended.

However, this failed to improve matters if the `SmallVec` started in Array
state even if reserving the requisite space as reported by `size_hint().0`
would have switched it to Heap state. Clearly a better path was to `reserve`
first (which would push the `SmallVec` into Heap state if the current size plus
the minimum size hint overflowed the array) to optimize for this common path,
as in practice, `SmallVec`s are often extended with slices which have correct
size information.

Next, I switched around the order of matched variants which appears to have
assuaged the borrow checker, because I never got any error. Now the code reads
better, and benchmarks were very favorable (especially in the case where the
`extend` pushes the `SmallVec` into Heap state).

# TinyList

That got me thinking. What other parts of the code could use improvement? I
looked in the `rustc_data_structures` crate and found `tiny_list.rs`,
containing a simple singly-linked list.

Both the `insert` and `remove` methods looked quite convoluted for a simple
linked list. Seeing that there were no benchmarks, I added some for insert and
remove (to ensure I wasn't negatively impacting performance) and started
refactoring the code.

First, let's look at `insert`. The original version:

```rust
pub fn insert(&mut self, data: T) {
    let current_head = mem::replace(&mut self.head, None);

    if let Some(current_head) = current_head {
        let current_head = Box::new(current_head);
        self.head = Some(Element {
            data,
            next: Some(current_head)
        });
    } else {
        self.head = Some(Element {
            data,
            next: None,
        })
    }
}
```

This looks complex, and there is a lot of duplication. Yet the only difference
between the `Some` and `None` branch is that if `current_head` was
`Some(head)`, it has to be boxed, whereas `None` values stayed `None`. Rust's
`Option` type already has a function for those cases, so I just took the
`mem::replace(..)` and `map`ped `Box::new` over it to get our new `next`. The
function becomes:

```rust
pub fn insert(&mut self, data: T) {
    self.head = Some(Element {
        data,
        next: mem::replace(&mut self.head, None).map(Box::new),
    });
}
```

Much easier to follow, although sadly not changing performance at all, because
the compiler very likely saw through the old code already.

The `remove` case was a bit more involved. I must confess that I at first could
not understand what the code did, but the data structure only allows for three
cases which were easy enough to trace through:

1. The list is empty (`self.head == None`), so `return false`
2. The list has an element and the data is found, so replace `self.head` with
   `*self.head.next` (the `*` is to unbox it) and `return true`
3. The list has an element, which has different data: Call into the element
   chain recursively to remove it if found

Simply removing the existing code and coding up a `match` block with the three
cases led to much easier code and a performance win. Apparently this time the
compiler didn't see through the second `match` and the extra `unwrap()` call. I
missed the unboxing operation at first and got a sufficiently helpful type
error. Most of my time was spent waiting for the benchmarks to run.

# Moral of the story

Similar to how the walkaways operate in [Cory Doctorow's eponymous book], the
Rust compiler gets written by many people trying different things. Errors and
inefficiencies will be routed around, and while the result may look messy at
first, the whole thing converges to a damn fine state, if enough people care.

So if you are somewhere on Rust's learning curve and want to chime in, there
are a lot of things to be done. Finding code that can be improved isn't too
hard (maybe we could start an initiative to help here?), nor is actually
carrying out the improvement. So don't shy away and bring those PRs! Happy
Rusting!

[Rust]: https://www.rust-lang.org "The Rust Programming Language"
[This Week in Rust]: https://this-week-in-rust.org
[#52859]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/52859
[#52942]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/52942
[#52997]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/52997
[perf.rust-lang.org]: https://perf.rust-lang.org
[Cory Doctorow's eponymous book]: https://craphound.com/walkaway/
