---
title: What Rust Needs in 2018 to Succeed
---

In the spirit of the current Rust blog post extravaganza, here are my
2¢ on the most important work to make Rust win big:

## Language

We're on a very good way here, what's needed is stabilizing the
things already in flight:

* Non-lexical lifetimes
* Specialization (in whatever capacity we can soundly allow)
* declarative macros 2.0
* procedural macros 2.0
* autogenerate trait impls for arrays of arbitrary size

## Standard library

I think we need to finish the existing data structures (especially the
maps amd their entries, ranges, etc.), and fill in the remaining
blanks.

One thing that stands out is SIMD support, which is desperately needed
for performance in various projects and currently relies on nightly.

## Tooling

* Stable clippy and rustfmt are already on track. Yay!
* NRC recently showed an early alpha for a graphql system for Rust –
  this has a lot of potential
* support for more software quality assurance techniques, e.g. mutation
  testing, design by contract / semi-automatic validation, etc.
* improve IDE support, especially quick fixes, refactorings and
  Rust-specific visualizations (e.g. lifetimes)
* Improve support for i18n / l10n of Rust code
* And the big one: Improve packaging support: We need to make geting
  Rust code on an arbitrary system a piece of cake (xargo and
  android-glue already cover this to some extent), whether compiling
  or just deploying it

## Crates

* Discoverability has improved in 2017, but that doesn't mean we get
  to rest on our laurels – we should double down on this
* Obviously, we cannot force people to choose one or other project, but
  it would be great if we could somehow focus our collective resources
  on fewer standard high-quality crates
* What's most needed: Database drivers, standard file/wire format
  support, GUI (this one's been a big pain point so far)

## Community

* We're on a good way here, with [Ashley](https://twitter.com/ag_dubs)
  and [Florian](https://twitter.com/argorak) (and a whole lot of others)
  supplying teaching resources. Those efforts cannot be commended too
  much! My hat's off to both of them
* We should ask how to improve support for local meetups to strenghten
  community cohesion (In the undying words of Steve Ballmer:
  "Developers! Developers! Developers!")
* The outreach to companies using (or planning to use) Rust has been
  off to a good start in 2017, let's make 2018 the year of Rust in the
  enterprise!
* As the community grows, we will have to deal with more trolls. So far
  the mods of the official channels have done an OK job doing this, but
  still 2017 had a few incidents. I foresee the need to expand the mod
  team in 2018

So here's to a great 2018 for all Rustaceankind!
