---
title: The Case For Macros
---

I know a few Rustaceans who are wary of macros. One privately admitted to
hating them with a passion. They are right; macros can make code harder to
understand (both for humans and computers, for example many clippy lints have
an explicit check to only lint outside of macros), so they should be used with
some caution.

On the other hand, Rust's type system, while powerful, sometimes won't allow
deduplicating a piece of code, because it's not always possible to make the
types line up correctly. In those cases, we are given a choice:

1. Copy & Paste the code
2. Generate the code
3. Use a macro

All of those options have their problems and benefits.

*Copying the code* means there are N varsions of it around. So the code is now
much harder to navigate, because you have the same shapes N times. What was one
bug before now turns into N bugs, and if the code is large, it's easy to get
lost and miss one of them. This also applies to other changes, which you must
follow through to all N versions. One benefit is that it's easy to manage if
some of the N versions actually need to diverge. Also the compiler won't need
to expand anything, so in theory this could lead to a faster build than the
other options (however, this is usually negligible, unless the macros become
very complex).

*Code generation* ensures consistency between the N versions of the code. It is
the most flexible approach, because while the end product must be valid code,
the parts from which it is generated need not be. Plus, you can use whatever
libraries you have to aid your code generation task. However, in Rust this
means you have a `build.rs` that must be compiled and run before your build can
even start, so it imposes a cost in turnaround time even for a plain
`cargo check`. Also because the generation code lives outside the crate code,
it is easier to overlook. I personally find code generation too powerful and
keep its use reserved for cases where not even macros work (for an example,
[mutagen] uses code generation for both the library and plugin).

Finally. *macros* (and I mostly mean macro-by-example here) strike a balance
between power and descriptiveness. Every Rustacean uses them to some extent
(for example `println!` for writing out stuff). Macros have often been used to
prototype language features (case in point: The `?` operator began its life as
a `try!` macro). The standard library uses macros extensively  to define
operations on integer types, even down to the doc comments. This allows us to
generate code and docs with working doctests from a single source, and given
the amount of code it's blazingly fast.

That said, macros *do* have their downsides: They can obfuscate the code, can
be hard to debug if something goes wrong. Though rustc affords us some tools to
alleviate this, notably macro tracing and expanded output, those tools are not
yet very refined. Thus one best keeps the complexity within macros as low as
possible, for now.

Even if the tools leave something to be desired for now doesn't mean it has to
be like this: For example, [railroad] is a cool idea to improve the
documentation of macros on the input side. It doesn't tell us what the results
will be, though. The space appears somewhat under-explored. How about a crate
to "animate" macro expansion with <kbd>&lt;&lt;</kbd> and <kbd>&gt;&gt;</kbd>
keys? Do LISPers have other cool tools to deal with macro difficulties (I know
that at least in clisp the REPL has ways to show the expansion of a macro)?

[mutagen]: https://github.com/llogiq/mutagen "mutagen Rust mutation testing framework"
[railroad]: https://github.com/lukaslueg/macro_railroad
