---
title: Corner Cutting vs. Productivity
---

I recently got into a discussion with another very knowledgeable Rustacean, who (I paraphrase)
claimed that Rust is about adding just enough roadblocks to keep you from cutting corners. This is
a nice metaphor because it explains a lot: Rust may *feel* more cumbersome, because it won't let
you cut corners. On the other hand, once it compiles, many classes of errors will already have been
taken care of, so your code will usually work as expected (or if you're new to Rust, unexpectedly
well).

This theme is pervasive throughout. Not only is the compiler strict, it is also often surprisingly
helpful (and you can help make it even better, see [issues marked with A-diagnostics](TODO)!), the
docs are so good (and with doctests also useful as tests) that they make you try to emulate their
style (confession: I've never documented any code as well as my Rust code) and the Code of Conduct
keeps you from cutting corners in personal interactions (sure it would be *easier* to be an
<s>[XXXXXXX]</s>, but it will hinder more than help in the long run).

But I think this view implies that Rust is all roadblocks, which isn't true. So my counter-argument
here is that Rust is an experiment to see how productive it can make you without letting you cut
any corners. I used to say "Writing Rust may be a little harder, but writing *incorrect* Rust is *a
lot* harder". But I (carelessly?) omitted the reference point. Harder than what? Today my
conclusion is "harder than cutting corners in other languages". But even that may underestimate
Rust's design.

Consider for example the `?` operator, which together with the `Result` type creates an easy way to
correctly handle all errors. Now let's see the alternatives:

* Go will simply return errors, and together with multiple return values this forms a poor man's
monadic error handling, unless for the fact that you can (and may out of lazyness or
forgetfullness) cut corners and omit the error handling, with results ranging from benign to
disastrous. The worst thing about this error handling style is that the failure mode (what happens
if you forget to cross the *t* or dot the *i*) is that the code runs as if the error didn't happen,
possibly running into follow-up errors later that will be harder to debug because the original
problem has been silently ignored
* Java has unchecked exceptions, which are mostly as bad as Go's returns but for the slightly
better failure mode of an early exit until the next catch block. While unchecked exceptions were
usually reserved for programmer error and should not be caught at all, this is often done
regardless (and sometimes for good reason), so the failure mode very much depends on the catch
blocks on the call stack. In the worst case the error will be silently discarded (though this is
deemed very bad style), otherwise it will hopefully at least be logged. Java also has checked
exceptions, which must be caught somewhere, and should be used for errors stemming from system or
input (e.g. `IOException`). To some this is the worst of both worlds, requiring more ceremony with
little benefit. On the other hand, it at least compels the programmer to somehow deal with the
errors that may happen. The downside compared to Rust is that it is unclear *where* in the
`try`-`catch` block the exception may happen
* Python's exceptions are similar to Java's unchecked exceptions, but have the downside of dynamic
typing here. At least in current versions you can only `raise` things deriving from `BaseException`
– earlier versions even allowed `raise "Ouch"`
* Lua allows you to call a function with an error handler, which is like a function-wide catch
block
* On the non-GC language side, C++ has exception, but they are notoriously hard to work with while
avoiding memory leaks and almost-constructed objects. Many programmers will try to avoid them for
this exact reason, and I always have a smidgen of doubt if my C++ code is really exception-safe.
* C uses a mixture of return codes (which have the same downsides as with Go) and an archaic
mechanism called `setjmp`/`longjmp`, which allows you to setup a handler and jump into it from
arbitrary code. This *can* be used for basic error handling (and is for example used as the basis
for Lua error handling)

In summary, the Rust way is both easier, naturally leads the programmer to do the right thing and
conveys more information to boot.

A related example is Rust's use of 'Option<_>` to represent nullable values. Thus the type system
keeps you from forgetting to deal with the `None` case while simultaneously giving you combinator
functions (for example the powerful `map_or`) that make working with those types easy.

* C, C++ and Java have `null`, lua has `nil` (which is the same thing under a different name). It
has the same bad failure mode as ignoring an error. At least in Java, you will get a
`NullPointerException` at the point of *dereferencing* the null (which may not be the same point as
obtaining it). In C or C++ you'll get a segmentation fault if you're lucky, and nasal demons
otherwise.

Let's take another example, splitting strings. In Rust, you get a `Split` object, which is an
`Iterator` over borrowed immutable string slices. This both avoids allocation for the parts and
lets you deal with the values one by one without needing a container. One can call `.cloned()` to
get `String`s of the subslices. Easy and performant. The downside is that we need two string types,
`&str` for borrowed string slices and `String` for owned strings. So what do other languages do?

* Java's `String.split(..)` returns an array, which necessitates an allocation and requires either
a count of the substrings before building or some kind of reallocation. Worse, until a certain Java
1.7, the substrings reused the internal char array of the original String, which kept the reference
alive even if just a small part of the substrings were used. Since then, the substrings copy their
char arrays from the original String, which doubles the memory churn, but lets the GC potentially
collect the original String earlier. Unfortunately, there is no better method, because Java's
objects won't let you differentiate between borrowed and owned Strings the way Rust does
* Python's `str.split` method returns a list of substrings. I don't know if the returned strings
reuse parts of the original string, but it probably makes little difference anyway.
* Lua similarly returns a table of strings
* C++'s stdlib has a number of `split` functions on `std::string`, which allow working with
`string`s or `StringRef`s, and may use `SmallVector`s to avoid allocation for small numbers of
split substrings. I don't know if there is an iterating split, though
* C has no standard way to split strings that I know of. However, both glib and Apache Portable
Runtime have methods to do this that however need to copy the underlying `char[]` arrays to insert
the terminal `'\0'` and need storage for the substring indices.

Rust gives you a simple way to work with split strings without requiring allocation unless you
really need it. The borrow checker ensures it is all safe, where in other languages you'd have to
make copies left and right to be sure. Using the iterator's methods is not much harder than working
with the lists or arrays of substring, and lends itself to further optimizations. I'd like to note
that other languages make it basically impossible to safely match Rust's performance here. In this
case, the information retained in the `Split` iterator allows the compiler to eke out more
performance while keeping a familiar interface. Simply looping over the subslices will look mostly
the same as in other languages, and you only need a modicum of additional complexity to get
`String`s (`.cloned()`) or a collection (`.collect()`, though you may need to specify the type of
collection via turbofish).

Speaking of loops, Rust has `loop`, `while`, `while let` and `for` loops. While `loop` may seem
unnecessary, in fact all other loops are desugared into som `loop` + `match` combination. `for`
loops work with the `IntoIterator` and `Iterator` traits to compile down into well-performing code.

* C and C++ have a `for (<initializer>;<test>;<increment>)` … loop and a `while (<test>)` … loop
(also a version with a test after the loop body, `do {` … `} while(<test>);`). The `for` loop is
infamously sometimes misused for strange iteration patterns which may make the code hard to
understand. The block brackets `{` … `}` are optional for all but the do-while loop, however this
can lead people to misread code
* Java has both a C-style `for` and `while` loops, as well as a `for(<binding> : <iterator>)` loop
(spoken for-each loop) that works with arrays and `Iterable`s. The latter is now the preferred form
to iterate over collections of objects. Since Java 8, there are also `Stream`s which almost work
similar to Rust's `Iterator`s, except of course they don't allow as much control, miss some
functions and need to allocate to be safe
* Python has a `for` loop that works with its own iterator protocol which is similar to Rust's,
however it uses a `StopIteration` exception to break the loop instead of an `Option` type. Python
also has `while` loops. Since blocks are marked by indentation, it has less risk of misreading the
code, however it makes refactoring more cumbersome, and you run the risk of losing track in larger
swathes of code.
* Lua also has a `for` loop working with an internal iteration protocol similar to Lua's, but
returning a sentinel `nil` value to end the iteration.

Rust loops are as simple as high-level Python's, but offer far better performance.

My last example is destructuring pattern matching. Though it adds a lot of complexity to the
language, the resulting simplicity in the code is well worth it. Take a simple enum with a `match`
and you will both get the correct internals for each variant and be assured by the compiler that
you handled every possible variant.

* C and Java only have a `switch` statement that works on plain numeric values or `enum`s (which
may not contain additional data. You could use a tag enum + union idiom in C and would likely use a
polymorphic type in Java if you need to store data. The former is crude and won't give you any
assurance that you used the right variant. The latter can get quite unwieldy and won't give you the
same assurances either. As for the `switch` statement, both the fact that it is a statement instead
of an expression and that it allows fallthrough (you need to `break` from each `case`) exacerbates
the ergonomics.
* C++ has learned from this and now offers std::variant types, which are still not used widely and
I hear they have their own downsides
* Python and Lua simply don't have such statements. You need a wall of ifs or a dict/table to do
something like matching, and it still won't give you safe access to the data. In Python, you could
also use Java-like class polymorphism, but that doesn't get you better ergonomics either.

Short story short, Rust's enums + destructuring matches offer great productivity while doing away
with footguns other languages may allow or even prescribe. Here the language pays with a bunch of
complexity to make your code easier to both write and read (at least to the initiated).

I hope those examples have convinced you that disallowing cut corners needs to harm productivity
even in the short run. In the long run, being diligent obviously wins.
