---
title: Rust Faster SIMD edition
---

It's been a while since I've been playing the [benchmarksgame] with Rust. But I
recently found an interesting crate called [`packed_simd`] which had a
SIMD-ified version of some benchmarks, so as Rust stable now has `stdsimd`, we
should be able to speed up our benchmarks quite a bit.

If only that was so easy.

For a start, I took the [`n-body`] benchmark, because I knew the current entry
wasn't the fastest. I tried, and failed, to reproduce their algorithm using
`stdsimd` types. On `opt_level=2` I got almost correct to somewhat off results,
whereas on `opt_level=3` the optimizer decided that my calculations should be
rearranged to yield `-Inf` on every step. I then decided to take a step back
and rip out the stdsimd types and functions and replace them with simple
scalar implementations.

So basically I took their algorithm and instead of using `packed_simd` I
just implemented the types `struct F64x4(f64, f64, f64, f64)` and
`struct F64x2(f64, f64)` by hand. This time I got correct results. So I
figured I should see how much slower the autovectorized code really is – and
found a surprise: It's a good deal faster than our current entry and should
perform about the same as the gcc enty if the benefits translate linearly to
the benchmarksgame machine.

Awesome!

I should note that this solution is good *for now*, as it's possible, nay,
likely that future Rust/LLVM versions fail to autovectorize this particular
algorithm. I might still change the code to use stdsimd later in order to avoid
regressions like the one we had when upgrading from Rust 1.7 to 1.8.

# Spectral Form

The [`spectral_norm`] benchmark is similarly relying on autovectorization and
could benefit from the same trick. Out the `[f64; 2]`, in the `F64x2` from the
`n-body` benchmark and we run a whopping 27% faster!

Previous: 0m1,076s Real, 0m4,216s User, 0m0,007s System

With F64x2: 0m0,783s Real, 0m3,121s User, 0m0,002s System

Naturally, once we have an SIMD implementation of `n-body`, we can adapt this
code, too.

# Single Instruction, Multiple Pfannkuchen

For the [`fannkuch_redux`] benchmark, Cristi Cobzarenco's rayon-powered version
was the one to beat, and this time, I couldn't rely on autovectorization, as
the current LLVM optimizer doesn't vectorize shuffles. So I again took the
`packed_simd` version of the algorithm and implemented my own `U8x16` type
underneath (I uppercased the `U` to silence the lowercase-types lint) using
`stdsimd`'s `__m128` type.

What unsurprisingly resulted was roughly double the performance per core from
Cristi's version, but still slower on four cores. [rayon] is very good. So I
needed to rayon-ify my SIMD version following Cristi's example. However, both
algorithms diverged on a few counts, so I couldn't simply merge in everything.

* The simple algorithm from `packed_simd` updates the checksum on every flip,
whereas the rayon'd version keeps a `flip_count` and updates checksum and
maxflips afterwards. I find the latter version improves separation of concerns.
* The simple algorithm first generates masks for all rotations and flips.
* The simple algorithm uses a `State` struct with multiple methods that don't
easily correspond to the rayon'd version's state. On the other hand, the latter
uses `[u32; 16]` arrays instead of the smaller `U8x16` types used by the SIMD
version.
* Despite having a good deal of comments, the rayon'd version put most things
directly into the `fannkuch` function, which made it much harder to understand.
* Owing to the chunk splitting of the rayon'd algorithm, it needs to do stuff
differently to the naive version, which I found out when trying to substitute
the predefined SIMD shuffle masks for rotate/flip implementations in the
rayon'd version.

In the end I decided to use Cristi's version as a starting point and try to
replace scalar operations with SIMD code one by one, keeping the old code
around to be able to check for correctness.

The easiest way to get a speedup was to just use SIMD for flipping, replacing
this:

```
temp[1..i].reverse();
```

with this:

```
U8x16::from_slice_unaligned(&temp).permute_dyn(flip_masks[first_value])
                                  .write_to_slice_unaligned(&mut temp);
```

Previous: 0m9,046s Real, 0m33,847s User, 0m0,017s System

SIMD-flip: 0m6,990s Real, 0m27,356s User, 0m0,005s System

Roughly double the user time the single-core version takes, but half the wall
clock time on four cores. Can we go faster? You bet. The old version had an
optimization to only call `reverse` with more than two values, which required
me to store and load the `U8x16`. As flipping our pancake was now SIMD-fast,
this no longer gave us any gains, and ripping it out allowed me to stay in SIMD
land in the hottest loop, which now looked like the following:

```
flip = flip.permute_dyn(flip_masks[flip.extract0()]);
flip_count += 1;
```

One interesting wrinkle here is that the `_mm_extract_epi8` intrinsic isn't
inlined, so the resulting assembly has a
`callq  core::coresimd::x86::sse41::_mm_extract_epi8`. However, after changing
the loop to only do the extraction once, this accounts for less than 0.1%
runtime, so no need to worry about this.

SIMD extract once: 0m5,576s Real, 0m22,021s User, 0m0,006s System

Next step: Moving the permutation to SIMD code. This allows us to keep the
current permutation in `U8x16`, so the only non-SIMD shuffling that remains is
the calculation of the initial permutation. I may have some ideas to optimize
this, but for now I'll leave it as is:

SIMD loop: 0m5,129s Real, 0m20,240s User, 0m0,003s System

It's going to be interesting to see how this version stacks up on the
benchmarksgame server.

[benchmarksgame]: https://benchmarksgame-team.pages.debian.net/benchmarksgame
[`n-body`]: https://benchmarksgame-team.pages.debian.net/benchmarksgame/description/nbody.html
[`fannkuch_redux`]: https://benchmarksgame-team.pages.debian.net/benchmarksgame/performance/fannkuchredux.html
[`packed_simd`]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/packed_simd
[rayon]: https://docs.rs/rayon
