---
title: An Inopportune Consumption
---

I just failed to implement what looked to be a relatively simple opportunistic replacement so that
the compiler would accept the mutated code. But I'm getting ahead of myself.

The idea was to replace `while let Some(foo) = bar { .. }` and `if let Some(foo) = bar { .. }` by
putting the `bar` in a function. That function would look like the following:

````
pub fn<L: Letter> l(l: L, count: usize, flag: &AtomicUsize, mask: usize) -> L;
```

`Letter` would default to returning `self`, and be specialized for `Option`s, among other types.
But how can this go wrong?

### Attack of the `borrowck`

Let's for a moment ignore the specialization issue and just replace l with a simple id function:
`pub fn id<T>(t: T) -> T { t }`. Then we'd be mutating

```rust
while let Some(ref mut x) = y {
    if foo(x) { break; }
}
```

to

```rust
while let Some(ref mut x) = id(y) { // ← note the `id` here!
    if foo(x) { break; }
}
```

But what if `y` is non-`Copy`? In that case, our `id` call *consumes* `y`! No wonder this doesn't
compile. So what to do? Obviously we should be able to borrow, but now we must take care to
correctly mutate the level of borrowing:

If we take nothing out of the let binding (i.e. no non-wildcard matches), or only take out `ref`s,
we should be fine with introducing a `&` reference, e.g. `while let &Some(ref foo) = &next() { ..
}`. If however, like in the above example we take any `ref mut`, we'd need to mutate it to
something akin to `while let &mut Some(ref foo) = &mut next() { .. }`. Finally, if we take anything
by value, we're dealing with a `Copy`, so we mut reference `&mut`ably regardless in order not to
mutate an accidental copy instead of the original value.

Unfortunately, there is one roadblock because of [RFC #2005] (match ergonomics): On current
nightly, we can no longer infer the required binding mode from the pattern, and we cannot know the
type of our destructured value in general (for example we may not know what `foo.next()` returns).

[RFC #2005]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2005-match-ergonomics.html

Note that following the RFC will only automate putting the required `ref` or `ref mut` there, not
change the type of the destructured expression. Also we cannot in general use a mutable reference,
because that, too, may fall afoul of the borrow checker (please someone budget that for me, my
mutator is dying).

Trying to make the code more complex to move consuming the value somewhere else is not going to
work in the general case, but perhaps someone reading this has an idea how to solve this?
