---
title: A Self-ish Bug
---

I recently found a bug in [mutagen](https://github.com/llogiq/mutagen): The
"exchange arguments" mutation was actually ineffective, because the plugin code
inserting it looked like the following (simplified):

```rust
quote_stmt!(cx, report_coverage($n..$n + 1, &$sym[$flag], $mask);
                let ($a, $b) = if now($n) { ($b, $a) } else { ($a, $b) };)
```

Spot the bug? There are *two* statements in the `quote!` macro call. Only the
first one will actually be inserted, though, the second is silently dropped.

Ok, that wouldn't be too bad. I was in the process of refactoring the code to
pull coverage reporting into the mutagen calls (to reduce the amount of code
generated), so the `report_coverage` call was to go away anyway.

Except this bug masked another, more insiduous one: When I refactored, I found
that one of the test would no longer compile methods with `self` arguments,
running into Error `E0424` (`self` keyword used in static method). Consider me
confused.

The offending test code in question:

```rust
#[mutate]
impl ComplexStruct {
    fn interchange_self(self, other: Self) { }
}
```

The mutation *should* exchange `self` and `other`. Due to the fact that mutagen
bakes all mutations in, selecting the active mutation at runtime, we would emit
code like the following:

```rust
struct ComplexStruct;

impl ComplexStruct {
    fn interchange_self(self, other: Self) {
        let (__self, other) = if ::mutagen::now(1, ..) {
            (other, self)
        } else {
            (self, other)
        }
    }
}
````

Note the `__self`: We cannot bind `self` within a `let` binding, so we need to
replace it with another name, and this is the one we generate. Within the
block, we will replace all occurrences of `self` with `__self`, btw. but as
the method here is empty, this doesn't happen here.

So if I put the above code in a plain rust file, add an `fn main() {}` at the
end and run `rustc`, it compiles. My confusion intensified at this point.

In such situation, I usually take a step back to form a theory on what is going
on. Since the function invites the "exchange args" mutation and this mutation
might in this case modify `self`, I'll best confirm that the `self` parameter
is in fact the problem.

Changing the `let` binding in the mutation to `let (_, _)` fixes the
compilation and `cargo expand --test integration` shows the expected code:

```rust
impl ComplexStruct {
    fn interchange_self(self, other: Self) {
        // some other code removed for brevity
        static __COVERAGE115: [AtomicUsize; 1] = [ATOMIC_USIZE_INIT];
        let (_, _) = if ::mutagen::now(116, &__COVERAGE115[0], 2) {
            (other, self)
        } else {
            (self, other)
        };
    }
}
```

Could it be that the `self` isn't actually changed to a different ident? To
avoid making a long story longer, yes it could. Adding an `unwrap` call
confirmed this suspicion: The `self_sym` symbol was only defined if `self` was
actually mutable.

(That's why I ought to refactor this code – it's getting hard to navigate)

With that out of the way, we could finally replace `self`s and be on our merry
way, correcting the bug while making the code leaner.
