---
title: Momo · Get Back Some Compile Time From Monomorphization
---

Monomorphization has one problem (apart from being a ridiculous word that I'll
probably spell wrong every time): It generates rather a lot of code, bloating
binary size and potentially pessimizing execution cache usage. Often, generics
aren't really needed for speed, but for ergonomics: Library code might want to
present an easy-to-use generic interface that will automate some conversions.
However, this often means that almost each user gets their own version of the
code, leading to the aforementioned bloat (case in point: Earlier `clap`
versions were notorious for adding hundreds of kilobytes to the binary size –
for a simple command line parser).

The canonical solution is to factor out an inner method that contains all of
the code minus the generic conversions, and leave the outer method as a shell.
For example:

```rust
pub fn this<I: Into<String>>(i: I) -> usize {
    // do something really complicated with `i.into()`
    // potentially spanning multiple pages of code
    ..
}
```

becomes

```rust
#[inline]
pub fn this<I: Into<String>>(i: I) -> usize {
    _this_inner(i.into())
}

fn _this_inner(i: String) -> usize {
    // same code as above without the conversion
    ..
}
```

This ensures only the conversion gets monomorphized, leading to leaner code and
compile-time performance wins. The downside is that this burdens the code with
accidential complexity, because readers have to follow the indirection. Can we
do better?

How about this:

```rust
use momo::momo;

#[momo]
pub fn this<I: Into<String>>(i: I) -> usize {
    // do something really complicated with `i.into()`
    // potentially spanning multiple pages of code
    ..
}
```

This does the whole inner function dance for you, letting you concentrate on
your code while enjoying speedy compiles without getting in the way. [momo] does
handle three conversions:

* `Into<T>`: the inner function receives a plain `T`
* `AsRef<T>`: the inner function receives a `&T`
* `AsMut<T>`: the inner function receives a `&mut T`

Note that momo for now works only on plain functions. Methods are on the
roadmap, however. Also we may be able to allow further conversions in the
future. For example, I'd like to add `TryFrom` which would use `.try_from()?`
to bail early in the outer conversion method, but I wanted to get a working
prototype out as soon as possible.

PS.: The name 'Momo' is taken from the protagonist of the eponymous Michael
Ende book – a girl that fights (by mere existence) against the "gray misters"
who try to take time away from her peers. It's also a wordplay on
"MOnoMOrphization".

[momo]: https://github.com/llogiq/momo
