---
title: Arenas vs. Indices
---

When optimizing code, one thing I'm always looking for is memory layout and
access patterns. One such pattern is an arena: Reserve some sufficiently large
space to put your objects in, then allocate by incrementing a pointer. If your
objects are of a uniform type, you can basically simplify this to a `Vec` of
that type.

This also means that the indices into that `Vec` become quasi-references. And
because our objects are evenly sized, we can (in theory) index up to
`isize::MAX` elements. This *also* means that if we restrict ourselves to
storing not more than `u32::MAX` elements, we can get away with using a
`u32` as index even on 64 bit systems. If we restrict our arena to 64K elements
we can use a `u16`, and with a maximum of 256 elements, a `u8` is sufficient.

Why is that of interest? This brings me back to memory layout: If we have
multiple references, each will take 8 bytes on a 64 bit system. Reducing those
to 4 bytes for a u32 will reduce size of those types and thus reduce memory
usage, which can help staying in cache. With less objects in the arena, we may
be able to reduce pointer size even further.

As an aside, this is similar to what the JVM does with the [compressed oops]
optimization, the difference is a) we use object size as a multiplier instead
of alignment, thus possibly extending the "address space" and b) we restrict
the effect to objects within our arena, whereas the JVM can only use it for the
whole heap or not.

A minimum viable program would have the following definition:

```rust
struct MVPArena<T>(Vec<T>);

impl<T> MVPArena<T> {
    fn add(&mut self, T value) -> Idx { .. }
}

type Idx = u32;

impl<T> Index<Idx> for MVPArena<T> {
    type Output = T;
    fn index(&self, idx: Idx) -> &T {
        &self[idx as usize]
    }
}

// similar `IndexMut` left out for brevity
```

Objects could then be referenced by `arena[idx]`. This is acceptable when there
is only one arena, but becomes problematic if we have more of them. We could
take an `Idx` returned from one arena and use it with another, resulting in
either the wrong data or an out-of-bounds error.

### Extremely On-brand

Luckily, there's a way around this. It's called "branding" and has been
described in a [paper] by Hongwei Xu and Frank Pfenning and [converted to Rust]
by Gankro. We extend both the `Arena` and the `Idx` type with a phantom data
containing the *invariant* lifetime:

```rust
struct Idx<'a>(u32, PhantomData<*mut &'a ()>);
```

*Invariant* here means that the borrow checker may not contract or extend the
lifetime. We do this with a mutable pointer here because it means that the
compiler treats the data as if it's being both read and written to. The
former precludes shortening the lifetime, the latter inhibits extensions.

To use this we need to extend our Arena to store the same PhantomData, and
change `add` and `index` to unify the lifetimes:

```rust
// ..
fn add(&mut self, value: T) -> Idx<'a> {
    // ..
    Idx(index, self.tag)
}

impl<'a, T> Index<Idx<'a>> for MVPArena<'a, T> {
    type Output = T;
    fn index(&self, idx: Idx<'a>) -> &'a T {
        &self[idx.0 as usize]
    }
}
```

This way, the compiler will call us out whenever we try to mix up arenas and
indices.

There is one problem with this setup: The lifetime cannot leave the scope.
Why is this a problem? Let's see a very simple example one would use an
arena for: Build a tree.

```rust
struct Tree<'i>(Option<(Idx<'i>, Idx<'i>)>);

fn build_tree(arena: &mut Arena<'i, Tree<'i>>, depth: usize) {
    if depth == 0 {
        arena.add(Tree(None))
    else {
        arena.add(Tree(Some((build_tree(arena, depth - 1),
                             build_tree(arena, depth - 1)))))
    }
}

in_arena(|arena| { build_tree(arena, 3); });
```

This fails with a very unhelpful lifetime error: We cannot get the lifetime
out of the scope, and notably, we cannot store it within the arena, despite
the whole thing being teared down at the end.

### Not My Type

So we want to ensure that the indices are only ever given out by their
respective arena and not mixed between arenas. Since we cannot use invariant
lifetimes, we need another way to set up distinct types for each Arena. Can
we do that at all? Yes, with the help of proc macros.

There are a few ingredients here: First, the arena needs a constructor that
takes a distinctly-typed argument. Unfortunately, we need to make it public
because public macros cannot call private functions. So we make it `unsafe`
instead.

Next, we need a macro that creates a new type on each call. I'll spare you
the details, but it creates code like the following:

```rust
{
    struct Tag; // Some distinct type

    let mut __arena = unsafe { Arena::new(Tag) };
    let arena = &mut __arena;
    // .. do something with arena here
}
```

This will keep the user from mixing up indices with multiple arenas, because
macro hygiene means each part of the code gets its own `Tag` type. At least I
hope it works. I still have a nagging doubt that this whole idea might have a
hole somewhere through which all the unsoundness might come back.

Another downside is that our indices and arenas can no longer be `Send` nor
`Sync`. If we could share an arena between threads, nothing would keep us from
having two threads instantiate arenas from the same place in the code, which
means they could mix up indices.

The upside is that we can store our indices within our Arena. I consider this a
win, if only for the fact that I see no way to make it sound with multiple
threads, and many algorithm will work fine with a per-thread arena anyway.

### Indexing? Where we're going we need no...Indexing.

But is it really an arena if we need to call it to get a reference to a
contained object? Ideally, we could just deref `Idx` to `&T`. But this means
we'd need to keep the arena hidden somewhere to use for the `Deref`.

If we only have one Arena, we could in theory use a `static ARENA: Arena<T, B>`.
*But* this would mean fixing the type, plus *there can be only one* arena
throughout the program, limiting the usefulness of this approach considerably.

Another option is to augment our `proc_macro` to extend all derefs with our
arena pointer. For that to work, we'd need the following `Deref`
implementations:

```rust
// blanket impl to allow dereferencing non-arena values
impl<B, D, T> Deref for (D, SmallArena<T, B>) where D: Deref<T> {
    type Target = T;
    fn deref(&self) -> &T {
        &*self.0
    }
}

// this allows dereffing into the arena
impl<T, B> Deref for (Idx32<B>, &mut SmallArena<T, B>) {
    type Target = T;
    fn deref(&self) -> &T {
        self.1[self.0]
    }
}
```

The `DerefMut` impls are quite similar, so I won't show them here.

This allows us to remove the arena from the equation, but we have to make all
derefs into our arena explicit (as in `*t`). Also there is still the problem of
working within macros, especially if we have multiple nested Arenas. For now we
can work around this by parsing the token stream of inner `in_arena` calls. I'm
unsure if we need additional `Deref` implementations if two macro invocations
leave the tuples in the wrong order, e.g. `(arena1, (arena2, idx1))`.

We could in theory work with arbitrary code, but that would need some sort of
data flow analysis, and I'll leave that as an exercise for the reader.

### Other Memory Layouts

One benefit of the arena as designed is that the memory layout is continuous,
so indexing is a simple lookup. The downside is that the arena needs to
reallocate when growing and possibly copy around the memory. Depending on the
workload this may or may not matter, but it makes one wonder if there is
another way to set up the arena so that we can keep the memory we've allocated?

> All problems in computer science can be solved by another level of
> indirection

– David Wheeler

Other implementations use a `Vec<Vec<_>>` to store their data (those don't try
for efficient indexing, but we could do something similar). One possible
implementation would split the index into the high and low `u16` and use the
former to index the outer `Vec` and the latter for the inner one. For example
[toolshed] does this.

The benefit is that a simple shift + mask is enough to split the index, so
indexing requires a shift, mask and two lookups. On the other hand, there are
downsides: a) the memory allocation overhead scales linearly with the number of
elements. With our simple `Vec`-based solution, our allocation overhead scales
logarithmically (at least if we can `realloc` efficiently). Also the memory
overhead of the outer `Vec` grows linearly with the number of elements. We can
do better, at the price of some complexity.

Let's say we have an array of `Vec`s, the first one allocated with 64K, the
next one also at 64K, the next at 128K, the next double that and so on. With
some fairly simple math, we can split the index into an outer array index and
an index into the `Vec`. Also for efficiency reasons, we don't actually need a
`Vec` (we know the capacity and length of each `Vec` by our definition), so we
can just store an array of (possibly null) raw pointers and allocate each as
needed. As an aside, this is what Java streams do when a [`StreamBuilder`]
needs to reserve memory to store the stream elements.

This way, we keep our allocation load logarithmic without needing `realloc`. On
the other hand, indexing becomes more expensive, with one `leading_zeros`, a
shift and three masks. I still think that for many workloads, the increased
locality and reduced allocation overhead will make up for the more expensive
indexing.

I have some experimental code to that effect, but I'm not yet ready to push it,
also I'm not quite sure if it's a good fit for this crate, as indexing becomes
much more expensive in terms of CPU than working with plain references.

### The Silver Lining

There's a lot of space to cover here, and we've only just begun. If you like
hacking on this stuff, come join our project! You can find the code in the
[compactr_arena] crate.

[compressed oops]: https://shipilev.net/jvm/anatomy-quarks/23-compressed-references
[paper]: https://www.cs.bu.edu/~hwxi/academic/papers/pldi98.pdf
[converted to Rust]: https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/3oo0oe/sound_unchecked_indexing_with_lifetimebased_value
[toolshed]: https://crates.io/crates/toolshed
[`StreamBuilder`]: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/Stream.Builder.html
[compact_arena]: https://github.com/llogiq/compact_arena
