---
title: Tooling, Tooling, Tooling
---

There's the old adage that there are three important things for a house:
Location, Location and Location. Similarly, there are three important things
for a programming language: Tooling, Tooling and Tooling.

(One key aspect to Java's success by the way, is exactly the phenomenal tooling
that comes with the JVM. But I digress.)

This point was recently driven home for me following the tracks of the
[parallel conference 2019](https://parallelcon.de) – we have made awesome
strides in simplifying parallel programming by adding layers of abstraction
(from threads and semaphores to tasks and high-level management to parallel
streams), but we lose a bit of transparency and debuggability on each step.

For example, when you try to debug a parallel stream in Java, you lose the
connection between the original stream call and the current action of any
thread because the work stealing machinery gets in the way. I believe that
rayon's parallel iterators have similar problems, though I must admit I haven't
yet found a need to debug them. I don't even try debugging an asyc/await based
program on a multithreaded executor.

There seems to be a great chance for tool vendors to chime in: Create a
debugger that maintains the task abstraction and recreates the links between
forked tasks to allow users to see the intended flow of the program instead of
a tilted view of a mix of their code and the task executor/parallel stream API
interna. This applies to all programming languages that offer a task-based
abstraction, be it C, C++, Rust, Go, Java, C#, Clojure, Erlang, Elixir, Pony or
whatever floats your boat.

A lot lower down the stack there's SIMD, which I believe currently comes in
three flavors: Pseudo-assembly intrinsic functions, autovectorization or some
kind of library/extension in-between (offering a "nice" enough interface with
somewhat guaranteed vectorized code in the result). Intrinsics get unreadable
quickly, autovectorization is hard to debug if it fails to vectorize (though I
hear that the intel compiler generates very nice reports to help you with that)
and so we are left with the in-between (which for C and Fortran is OpenMP, for
Rust is something like [faster](https://crates.io/crates/faster) or
[packed_simd](https://crates.io/crates/packed_simd). I don't know what other
languages do in that space.

And again, there's the matter of debuggability, although the (non-functional)
issues at play are likely more subtle, because this time the abstractions that
keep us from deeply understanding why something is faster or slower are hidden
within the CPU cores and other intermediaries such as the operating system. So
far we lack the tools to pierce this numerous veils; again I believe that major
strides could be made, both with regards to documentation and tools to help us
understand the performance implications of various code variants.

Going from performance to safety, Rust naturally has a good spot because many
guarantees are there by default, *but* only for safe code. Luckily
[Shnatsel](https://medium.com/@shnatsel), among others, work on bringing
sanitizer support and other improvements (e.g. fuzzing) to Rust, but we still
have some catching up to do to get to C++ levels of tooling (on the other hand
they have to rely on that kind of tooling more, because of the pervasive
unsafety they have to brave). Recent extensions to
[miri](https://github.com/rust-lang/miri) give hope that we can get high-level
support for finding and reporting unsound code, though it is as of now not
entirely clear if those reassurances hold up once LLVM is done with the code.

Of course all that doesn't matter unless the program compiles in the first
place. And rustc is one of the most finicky compilers out there. On the other
hand, it's also one of the most helpful ones in terms of error messages,
warnings and suggestions. This area sees a steady stream of big and small
improvements, and planned extensions will help to unlock even better compiler
UI (for example, Chalk offers a more principled way of looking at types, giving
us the chance to offer more specific error messages on type errors).

Library authors are using the immense power of the type system, which may
exacerbate usability if error messages get weighed down by humongous type
signatures rivaling template error messages in C++. It remains to be seen if we
can find ways to handle the complexity faster than we're piling it up.
