---
title: Arraigning a Statement, vol. 1
---

This time in our "Mutating Rust" series, we want to tackle the most complex mutation so far:
Statement removal. Now why do I think this is complex? It's just removing the statement (or, as we
bake our mutations into the code, activating at runtime, putting it behind an `if`), right?

Let's take a very simple example:

```rust
a();
b();
```

We want to be able to omit running the `a()` or the `b()`, depending on which mutation is active.
And in this simple example, it would easily work. Our mutated code might look like:

```rust
if !::mutagen::now(22) { a(); }
if !::mutagen::now(23) { b(); }
```

However, not all Rust code is that simple. The first obvious complication is that statements may
include `let` bindings, for example:

```rust
let x = 1;
println!("{}", x);
```

Trying the same simple logic would lead to the following code:

```rust
if !::mutagen::now(22) { let x = 1; }
if !::mutagen::now(23) { println!("{}", x); }
```

This leads to a compiler error, because the `let` binding is no longer in scope of the
`println!(..)` statement. Ok, so we need to keep track of locals. Since Rust allows, nay,
encourages shadowing, we have to keep all `let` statements, because they could change types, e.g.
the following compiles (though it will warn because the first `x` is unused):

```rust
let x = "Hi!";
let x = "Ho!";
println!("{}", x);
```

Ok, but let bindings only work within the same scope, so we at least don't need to care for nested
expressions? Unfortunately for us, Rust allows *deferred initialization*, as in the following example:

```rust
let x;
{ x = 1; } // Voilà, nested block!
println!("{}", x);
```

Well, at least we know all statements always only apply to code after the original statement? There
is one counter-example here, too:

```rust
println!("{}", X);
const X : &str = "Hi!";
```

(Update: The original version stated that `static` obeyed ordering, but this was tested against some
Rust 1.2x and it appears that resolve has changed in the meantime. Bummer)

So we have to filter `static` and `const` item statements from removal, but that's about it.
Luckily for us, both bindings for `const` and `static` obey scope boundaries, so we need not fear
nested statements in this vein:

```rust,compile-fail
// println!("{}", X); // ← Error: X not in scope
{
    const X: &str = "Ouch";
}
```

So for a minimum viable product we can remove free function-call statements, unless the arguments
contain any assignment or the return value is the return value of the block. Not much, but a start.
Stay tuned for the next entry in this series!
