---
title: Making Good On Momo's Compile-Time Promise
---

When I announced [momo], I wanted its users to save both binary size and
compile time while keeping their code simple. I succeeded in the first goal,
but failed regarding the second. The reason was that momo requires syn and
quote which (unless you have other proc macros in your dependencies) add their
own compile time to yours.

David Tolnay was apparently so frustrated with this problem that he took the
rust-wasm runtime, added a shim to expand proc macros and put everything
together under the [watt] project. Now I have taken momo and converted it to
use watt under the hood. To the user, this shouldn't change much, but speed up
the build a bit.

To measure this, I have my `check` example which is quite small, so the compile
time is dominated by compiling either syn or watt. The following table shows
the output of `time cargo run --example check` (with or without `--release`)
measuring a clean compile:

profile | debug+syn | release+syn | debug+watt | release+watt
real    | 10,714s   | 18,081s     |   5,786s   |   6,510s
user    | 23,174s   | 54,530s     |   9,483s   |  18,269s
sys     |  0,892s   |  0,618s     |   0,367s   |   0,257s

So this roughly halves the compile time, though the effect might be less
pronounced if you have more dependencies (because of parallelism wins) or use
momo more than I do in the example. The effect is larger on release builds.

The wasm blob by default is 2.8M. I got it down to 2.2M by activating LTO and
setting `codegen-units=1`. Furthermore, through the use of `wasm-strip` I was
able to reduce it to 760K, and using `wasm-opt -Os` brought it down to 670K.
This also massively reduced compile time, even more so with `--release`:

profile | debug+watt | release+watt
real    |  1,998s    |  0,597s
user    |  1,822s    |  0,516s
sys     |  0,157s    |  0,112s

To obtain `wasm-strip`, you need to clone the [Web Assembly Binary Toolkit].
Building it requires cmake, make and a C compiler. `wasm-opt` is part of the
[binaryen] package, which similarly needs to be built and installed.

I hear that using `wasm-opt -Oz` will reduce size further, at the cost of some
runtime performance, so I left it at `-Os`. I also did not set `panic=abort` to
ease debugging. I may change this later when momo has matured a little, but for 
now, this is plenty fast for my use case.

### In Other News

I also added `#[inline(never)]` and `#[allow(unused_mut)]` attributes to the
inner functions. This ensures our inner functions aren't inadvertently inlined,
which would counteract the effect of using momo, and quells warnings on `AsMut`
arguments which need to be declared mutable, but would warn on the inner `fn`.

So, if you held off from using momo because you were underwhelmed by its
compile time, now would be a good time to try again.

[momo]: https://github.com/llogiq/momo
[watt]: https://github.com/dtolnay/watt
[Web Assembly Binary Toolkit]: https://github.com/WebAssembly/wabt
[binaryen]: https://github.com/WebAssembly/binaryen
