---
title: Minimum Safe Abstractions
---

Recently, there's been a lot of talk about `unsafe` in the Rust world, and how
to deal with it. Let's recap: Rust has a subset called "safe Rust", with a few
very neat guarantees, such as memory safety and freedom from data races. The
superset that completes the language is called "unsafe Rust", and it still has
a number of cool safeguards, but it also has an escape hatch to allow bending a
few of them in order to let us write safe abstractions on top in much the same
language.

The keyword to open up this can of worms is `unsafe`, but this is *not* the
perimeter you need to secure. An `unsafe` statement means that the programmer
has taken it upon themselves to uphold the required invariants for memory
safety and will write the code in a way so that users calling into safe
functions cannot ever (whether in good or bad faith) undermine the safety.
Otherwise the code must be deemed unsound.

For a small-ish example, in [compact_arena], I use the type system to encode
the invariant that indices given out by `arena.add(_)` are only ever usable
with the same arena. This is done by binding an invariant lifetime to each
index and the arena and requiring that same lifetime on indexing so that we can
safely use unchecked indexing.

This shows a common pattern with `unsafe`: We are able to relax some
requirements (such as "no unchecked indexing") as long as certain invariants
("no invalid index") can be ensured. In this case, we have three moving parts:

1. The `mk_arena` macro ensures that the invariant lifetime given to
`SmallArena::new` is unique (note that this is a compile-time invariant)
2. The `add` function ensures that the resulting indices are valid for this
arena
3. The `index` function uses those two facts to allow quick unchecked indexing

Actually, there is a fourth part: The *absence* of any function that
invalidates an existing index. Adding such a function would make the code
unsound.

Returning to the *perimeter* of unsafety, it is generally agreed that it is the
module boundary. Privacy and coherence ensure that we can stop users from
reaching into our module and modifying internals, so this is the only practical
definition. In practice, there may be uses of `unsafe` that rely only on
invariants the containing function can already ensure. We currently lack the
tools to distinguish those cases, as invariants usually are stated in comments
or at best in `assert!` statements.

(Aside: It may be possible to use data flow as an approximation, but I doubt it
will give us a sound measure. For one, even in our example, some of the
invariants are type-based and contain no runtime data)

This leaves us with a module (or possibly crate) that we need to review and 
declare sound, as opposed to needing to look at the code as a whole, as is 
required when coding in unsafe languages, such as C. This difference cannot be 
overstated. The complexity of ensuring safety increases at least with the 
square of the number of potentially interacting parts of the code. This is also 
why safety guides for those languages favor strong decoupling, to limit those 
interactions.

Still, when writing unsafe Rust code, we can limit the workload for auditing
those unsafe parts by minimizing the scope of unsafety. As the title alludes,
this means building the smallest possible module that is still able to provide
a safe interface over the unsafety contained within. Note that this doesn't
need to be a *usable* interface – a parent module can handle that with safe
code.

This leaves us with two questions: First, how do we identify the minimum
safe abstraction, and second, given an existing module containing unsafe code,
how do we get there?

### Cross-Cutting Concerns

The oughties gave us a lot of hype around "Aspect-oriented programming". The
idea behind this concept is to untangle cross-cutting concerns. The classic
example was trace logging: You'd find `log.trace` calls at the start and end
of every method, though this has nothing to do with what the method actually
does.

Ripping the trace "aspect" out of the code and putting it into its own
"aspect" makes the rest of the code easier to read (I'll note that there are
problems with this approach, but let's not look into this right now).

So, let's treat each invariant we must uphold in our unsafe code as an
aspect, could we structure the code so that we get a series of layers where
each one upholds one invariant, and using the (somewhat) safe abstractions
underneath?

In our example, `SmallArena` uses a `Vec` as backing store. This means that
we don't have to care about out-of-bounds access or growing our storage. Our
only concern is to protect the `Index` operations.

On the other hand, the crate has two more arena types of different sizes that
use arrays of `MaybeUninit` as a backend. And here I haven't yet factored out
the invariant that we only can add elements up to our capacity and dealing
with `MaybeUninit`. For now, I feel that mixing those concerns is acceptable,
but as the crate grows, I might want to revisit that decision.

I also ought to think about the possibility that I may offer additional
functionality. Once I implement it, I will probably put all the unsafe stuff in
a submodule (that likely has a lot of `pub(crate)` so I can reach in) and use
this from the outer crate to present an ergonomic interface.

[compact_arena]: https://crates.io/crates/compact_arena
