---
title: An Apology
---

My [last post] drew the ire of some Rust blockchain/cryptocurrency developers.
This, while unintended, is not unwarranted, so here's my public apology: It was
wrong for me to ask for less blockchains and cryptocurrencies in Rust. Doing
this was a lapse of judgement on my part, and while I still think there's a
valuable discussion to be had, the short form did not allow for the nuance it
would have taken to steer this discussion away from the entirely predictable
flame war that followed.

Given this, I also apologize to the wider Rust community. I have failed you, 
and I am sorry about that.

I want you to know that my decision to ask for "less blockchains and
cryptocurrencies" was driven by unreflected fear: The fear that

* blockchain as a technology is so oversold that we will see a blockchain
winter and the Rust community would suffer collateral damage by association,
just as the Lisp community suffered the AI winter
* cryptocurrencies fail to live up to their potential to, in the words of
one blockchain developer rightfully scolding me, "democratizing participation
in a global financial economy", with their primary use by volume falling
somewhere between scams and money laundering

For the record, I do think that the latter problem is not inherent in the
definition of cryptocurrencies, but is a failure of currently dominant
implementation, or rather the economy that has been created around them. I
still feel that the industry ought to demonstrate that decentralization really
outweighs the cost in complexity, compute and energy (and saying "but proof of
stake is much better than proof of work" won't really change the equation) for
e.g. the 22 million African people they purport to help, lest they fall in the
same overselling trap as blockchain evangelists.

I have no idea if those fears will become reality. Still I let them guide my
judgement, and again, I apologize for doing so. I should have left this topics
for a more thorough blog post. I may be unqualified to write that post.

[last post]: https://llogiq.github.io/2019/10/30/rust-2020.html
