---
title: Yes, I am still learning Rust
---

Recently, I got yet another nice email from a "talent sourcing 
specialist" asking me if I'd like to work for their company. This one 
stood out from the usual blockchain recruiting spam by actually looking 
at this blog. And they told me their expectations were lowered by the 
front matter stating that I'm currently learning Rust (though not too 
badly, because they actually looked at the commit history and found out 
it was written in 2015).

This led me to the question if I should change my front matter. (Aside: 
I did change it, removing the Java reference, because I'm now working 
with Rust. Yay!) Am I still learning Rust? After 5 years? How time 
flies!

I used to learn a new programming language every one or two years for a 
good while. Yes, I'm a programming language afficionado. Still, there's 
so much to learn with Rust that I've still not finished learning it. To 
master it might easily take a lifetime. Rust is really huge. But I 
could quit anytime I want, I console myself as I try out yet another 
cool technique.

I won't stop though, because besides being huge, Rust is really fun! 
Because there's so much cleverness and attention to the details, new 
features will interact in absolutely-non-horrible ways. This means that 
things usually work out completely unsurprising. What's more, looking 
for surprises often results in delightful new techniques.

Rust evolves steadily. I'd argue mostly for the better. This may sound 
like a contradiction – how can something so good get better? – but Rust
despite all its greatness still has some rough edges that are
continuously sanded down. Also Rust gleefully borrows concepts from
other languages to see if they fit.

There's async fn, const generics (which will take some time to become 
stable) and there are still some rough edges around procedural macros 
(with a very interesting RFC which would make them asynchronous as 
well). A recently found soundness hole around pin will lead to negative 
impls, which were proposed before but avoided because the interactions 
were insufficiently understood. I have high hopes for this one. In 
short, there doesn't seem to be a dearth of things to learn anytime 
soon.

So, yes, I am still learning Rust.
