---
title: Rust as a High Level Language
---

Recently I got into a [discussion] whether Rust is suitable as a high level
language (First warning sign: Discussion, second: unclear meaning of terms). So
I want to reproduce my argument here, hopefully to the benefit of the reader.

So, what is a high level language? First, our working definition assumes that
we talk about programming languages. Historically, a high level language was a
language that offered structure beyond plain assembly (or even machine code).
However, with the proliferation of C and Fortran, this particular goalpost
shifted considerably.

Today, many see e.g. Python or Haskell as high-level languages and C or Fortran
as low-level languages (I should however note that this notion is 
[not universally embraced]).

> A programming language is low level when its programs require attention to 
> the irrelevant.

– Alan Perlis

Of course, as a systems programming language, Rust allows attention to details
that are not functional requirements for most software, but may be vital in
some special domains, say embedded or operating systems.

Rust has unions (in addition to enums), lets the user control monomorphization
and (somewhat) memory layout, and can generally do anything that C could do
(but with less undefined behavior).

Some people mistake this to mean that Rust is a low-level language and can not
adapt to high-level problems. The opposite is the case: The same qualities that
make Rust excel at building abstractions out of low-level moving parts also
come in very handy when building high-level abstractions on top.

I know it's not a complete overlap, but one of the main ways Rust deals with 
low-level problems is `unsafe` code: This is for parts that are so low-level as
to be opaque to the compiler. When we look into the actual [use of unsafe], we
find that the vast majority of Rust code is safe. This is not a coincidence.

One thing that sets Rust apart is that it enables creating nice abstractions on 
top of the lower levels. What's more, I don't need to write all those 
abstractions by hand, because cargo lets me easily reuse a lot of great Rust 
code that is out there already.

This of course requires us to be mindful of the interfaces we create. The best 
crates have beautiful high-level interfaces that offer best-in-class 
performance nonetheless. The second best solution is to have two sets of APIs, 
one high-level but with lower performance and one lower-level for those with a 
need for speed.

Coming back to the question of what sets high-level programming apart from 
low-level programming, we can see that it is usually working on top of 
abstractions. And Rust lets us choose – we have crates that do a lot of stuff 
below the surface with a nice API, e.g. [anyhow], [regex], [serde] or [diesel].

(Aside: Yes, part of those crates use macros to some extent. No, that is not a 
shortcoming of the language.)

There are some things that differ from other high-level languages. One notable
difference is the pervasive use of monadic error handling via `Result` (which
looks alien to Pythonistas, whereas Haskellers will feel right at home).

The distinction between borrowed and owned values also sometimes results in
some `&` and `*` sigils in the code, though I doN't find those too distracting.

Finally, local type inference means that often small functions have more header 
than body. The upside is that the types make the code much more readable.

In summary, Rust spans both the low and high level, and it is up to us, the 
programmers to make our abstractions not only fast, but usable. I'll leave you 
with a link to some [guidelines] Pascal Hertleif has collected a good while 
ago on his blog.

[discussion]: https://twitter.com/jdegoes/status/1265764773309886465
[not universally embraced]: https://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=3212479 "C is not a low level language"
[use of unsafe]: https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/g0wu9b/percentage_of_unsafe_code_per_crate_for/
[anyhow]: https://docs.rs/anyhow
[regex]: https://docs.rs/regex
[serde]: https://docs.rs/serde
[diesel]: https://diesel.rs
[guidelines]: https://deterministic.space/elegant-apis-in-rust.html
