---
title: Catch 22! Rust in Review
---

It's getting late in the year, so it's time to write another blog post looking
what good and bad came out of the year for Rust and what's likely to happen
next year.

I guess the second part is also a roadmap post for the next year, so there's
that.

## Language

Language-wise, 2022 was a great year for syntactic sugar, with `let`-`else`
rapidly reaching stable (I must admit I wasn't even aware of it until I read
the release blog), and `let` chains being worked on in nightly. I was wary of
those until I tried them in the clippy codebase, since then I'm very happy
we'll get them sooner or later. We also got 
[GATs](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2022/10/28/gats-stabilization.html) in 1.65!
Those who don't know what that is, don't worry, it's all good, and for the
others, that was well worth the wait. Finally!

There also has been some really great work on the async front, with a MVP for
async trait landing in nightly in mid-November. No more hacks with attribute
macros and boxing all futures, yay!

Some new features were just filling gaps, like destructuring assignments
which brought them to parity with `let` bindings. While they undoubtedly made
the implementation more complex, the language complexity was reduced by one
special case.

## Compiler

The compiler still got faster, despite serving more features and improving the
error messages even more. Cranelift and rustc-codegen-gcc are progressing
nicely, and gcc-rust was recently merged into GCC proper. mrustc is still
alive and well, so we'll soon have three compilers and three backends (LLVM,
gcc, cranelift) for the official compiler.

## Tools & Ecosystem

Rust analyzer got a well-deserved promotion to a proper rust-lang project.
With [helix](https://helix-editor.com/) for the terminal and
[lapce](https://lapce.dev/) using its own GUI, we now have two native Rust
editors written in Rust that use the rust-analyzer backend. Cargo gained an
inbuild implementation of the `cargo add` subcommand, which was formerly only
available through the [`cargo-edit`](https://github.com/killercup/cargo-edit)
crate. The `gitoxide` git source control system implementation finally gained
enough functionality to `clone` itself.

The tokio runtime saw a steady stream of improvements, with the former making
headway in safe & fast web service implementations and notably tooling to dump
#an "async backtrace" in case something goes wrong, which finally closes an
important gap between sync and async debugging. Async-std development seems to
have stalled, with the last commit dating from July.

GUI-wise, we've seen multipe frameworks come to life, from the Xi-editor
inspired [druid](https://github.com/linebender/druid) and its likely successor
[xilem](https://github.com/linebender/xilem) over the startup-sponsored
[slint](https://slint-ui.com) to [iced](https://github.com/iced-rs/iced) and
[dioxus](https://github.com/DioxusLabs/dioxus). Other toolkits saw progress,
too, the [AreWeGUIyet](https://www.areweguiyet.com) page lists many of them.

## Growth

[Crates.io](https://crates.io) has more than 99k crates now. This time last
year it was about 70k, so the growth hasn't stalled at all. The registry has
counted 24.4 billion downloads, which is more than double last year's count!
The [subreddit](https://reddit.com/r/rust) has cracked 200k subscribers in
October and is now bigger than [r/golang](https://reddit.com/r/golang) which
it had trailed all the years before. It's kept it's 19th spot in the redmonk
index, and won top spot in the yearly "most loved"
[StackOverflow survey](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022/#most-loved-dreaded-and-wanted-language-love-dread),
in addition it's "most wanted" for the second year in a row.

The blockchain winter is now in full swing, with many of the fraudulent
players going broke. Luckily, my
[fear](https://llogiq.github.io/2019/11/05/fear.html) that Rust would suffer
by association didn't become reality. The job growth in other fields like
machine learning, cloud and elsewhere easily outweighed the losses in
blockchain-related Rust jobs. Phew!

This part of the growth curve doesn't come out of thin air: Many companies
large and small spun up Rust teams. We make inroads in the cloud, on mobile,
in embedded (notably automotive and aerospace, where the groundwork is
[currently being laid](https://medium.com/volvo-cars-engineering/why-volvo-thinks-you-should-have-rust-in-your-car-4320bd639e09)),
in machine learning (where python still reigns supreme, but Rust could win
sometimes by superior performance and type-based coding ergonomics). The
current Android version 13 has
[more than 1.5 million Rust lines of code](https://security.googleblog.com/2022/12/memory-safe-languages-in-android-13.html).
There's Rust
[in the Linux kernel](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8aebac82933ff1a7c8eede18cab11e1115e2062b)!

Those folks who spelled Rust's doom because there wasn't enough buy-in from
companies now spell it's doom because there's so much buy-in. I guess some
things never change.

## Governance

The foundation has really come into its own this year. Kudos to all involved!
With the
[community grants](https://old.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/vc4pcm/community_grants_program_awards_announcement/),
the foundation directly allowed more people to work on what they love while
boosting the Rust ecosystem. Also I hear there has been some lobbying in the
US that resulted in Rust being the official recommendation for low-level
projects.

The project restructuring also saw some good progress; I am personally very
happy with the outcome so far.

---

Now for a look ~~in the crystal ball~~ on the roadmap:

## Language

I see chains of `let`. Async traits, too. I see them bloom for me and you. And
I think to myself, what a wonderful Rust... or something. `try` blocks will
have to prove their worth in the nightly implemenation. I haven't tried them
yet, so I cannot predict if they land next year. We will see more whittling
down the missing pieces of features we got this year for sure. Especially on
the async side of things I expect more movement regarding pinning and avenues
for optimizing the task machinery for various use cases.

I have high hope for negative trait bounds which sound like they will enable a
bucket of interesting use cases, especially with regards to avoiding the need
for specialization. Though there is some compatibility hazard, I'm sure the
lang team will take sufficient precautions to make it a net win.

## Compiler

I guess it's safe to say the compiler will get even faster in '23, though we
may already see diminishing returns.

As for the backends, we'll see gcc-rust mature somewhat, and rustc-codegen-gcc
as well as cranelift become useable for more cases. Perhaps even some kind of
stabilization.

I sure hope we'll see more evolution on the macro machinery. WebAssembly could
be a great base on which to rebuild the macro system; we could even cache
pre-compiled macros or have crates.io serve proc-macro crates as WASM blobs,
thus reducing compile time for their users.

## Tools & Ecosystem

The Rust experience is already pretty good, and the stream of improvements is
unlikely to ebb next year. I'd note that with the newly set up fmt team, I
expect notable advances in rustfmt functionality.

Most Rustaceans wish for some consolidation; do we really need three async
runtimes, eleven web frameworks, fourteen GUI libraries and a dozen or so hash
map crates? On the other hand, I think we haven't seen the end of the
experimentation phase; in fact it may just have begun. So I fully expect more
delightful new libraries and surprising crates come up every now and then. One
size need not fit all, as they say.

## Growth

Rust has reached the tipping point. From here on the only way is up. The only
thing that could pull the trajectory back down would be for an even better new
language to emerge, and I don't expect one to appear in the next three years.
That said, if it does appear, I'm *so* here for it.

With this explosive growth come a set of challenges, which nicely brings us to
the next point:

## Governance

The foundation has shown it can do more than taking care of the trademark or
sponsoring email services for This Week in Rust. Now is the time to expand the
involvement. The current community grants are a good start, but they're pretty
narrow. The foundation could team up with universities to sponsor PhD theses
around Rust. It could give out a yearly award for the most innovative use of
Rust in the industry. It could lobby more governments to make memory safe
languages the official recommendation.

I dare not hope to see memory safety mandatory, but perhaps at one point it
could become a sign of negligence to write code in a memory unsafe language
unless there is a good reason to do so. The first country to enact such laws
is going to rule the software sector for years to come.

The project will continue spinning out working groups. Currently those can
organize however they see fit, but we'll start to see some standards emerge.
While this will lead to some small frustration on some members' part, it will
ultimately help transparency and inter-team ventures.